Antinomicity 
Craig Warren Smith 


Novella 


Copyright © Craig Warren Smith 


All rights reserved 


The moral rights of the author have, to a 
cursory extent, been somewhat asserted. 


www.wrenasmir.com 


2022 


Abrachas Publishing 


Antinomicity 


Novella 


va 


Craig Warren Smith 


For Nietzsche, midday is not a moment of 
unification, when the sun embraces everything, 
but is, instead, presented as the moment when 
‘One turns to Two'. 

— Alenka Zupancic 


The light is like a kind of lengthy explanation - 
the light is like two thoughts occurring at once. 


— Matthew Welton 


Preface 


I once overheard advice that to be a good poet 
you should spend years walking on uneven ground. 
Abrasions in the landscape, sloping  declivities, 
meadows that turn into boulders — these are where one 
develops an ear for a line of text. A lifetime on concrete 
can only provide the most pedestrian of rhythms, too 
regular, like a metronome conducting a marching band. 
Given, then, that most of this book was written along 
level, constructed, synthetic trajectories, I could use this 
to justify prosodic weakness and flatline cadence, with 
the exception perhaps for one patch of treacherous 
ground that was the birth knell of this book. 

There is a secluded beach in Newcastle that is 
only accessible at two entry points — the easiest way, but 
less reliable, is to curve around a narrow run of sand 
that links to an adjoining beach, but this is only 
available during a significantly low tide, and it feels as 
though this is occurring with diminishing frequency. 
The most reliable, but more fraught, access is to hop 
over a safety fence at the top of the cliff that shadows 
the beach, carefully making your way down an 
improvised walkway of flaking shale and loose stones. 

I’m setting up the punchline here by 
foreshadowing the situation, as this is the path I took 
one late afternoon that saw me, seconds later, lose grip 
and dance atop a crescendo of rocks that rapidly became 
impatient with my stability, leading me to tumble, 
somersault, down the cliff for some handful of 


unforgiving seconds until I thudded onto the sand. 

While I sat in a nearby rockpool and bathed my 
wounds in salt water for the rest of the afternoon, my 
mind settled into its favourite posture, one of earnest 
reverie, cycling through recent and distant memories. It 
feels as though my reflections naturally slot and 
sequence within two broad categories - time spent with, 
and without, people. Mostly, I thought about a recent 
period with my children, and the sort of mirror they 
bracket around my waking life. A succession of events 
that occurred across no more than a week became the 
narrative of this short book, and in reading back what I 
have written it feels as though a very particular moment, 
developmentally, in the lives of my children, my wife 
and I, has, through the following thirty thousand words, 
been cast in an epoxy resin time capsule, like a family 
of insects preserved in amber. My son, for example, is 
different now in his language and his interests, just a 
few weeks on from when I finished writing this book, 
and yet I can witness with paternal tempo the way he was 
during the period described, through the eyes I was using 
at the time. 

Dangling my bruised legs in the water, allowing 
the ocean waves to cleanse them and hoping that I 
hadn't suffered any long-term injuries, I thought too 
about the role that walking has in my life. If my 
memories are separated into occasions with and without 
people, then my daydreams are nearly exclusively 


focused on places I can walk to. Psychogeography is 
what propels me forward, in both the physical and the 
metaphysical sense. One conclusion that I come to early 
on in this book is that walking in a conscious manner, 
with a view to observation, feels like a hunt for external 
landscapes that analogously mirror the internal 
landscape of subjectivity. If this book contains a 
detectable pulse, this idea might be the pump that 
regulates the flow. 

How many ways are there, these days, to walk 
without walking, beyond prose. My daughter and I 
found a virtual reality program called Japaneland that 
allows you to float above the islands of Japan until you 
see somewhere you'd like to touch down, at which point 
you drop into a region that has been graphically 
rendered based on satellite mapping data. Then you get 
to, quote unquote, walk around the neighbourhood. It's 
like taking a stroll through a computer generated 
version of Google Street View, glazed with an 
algorithmic filter that make brick walls look as though 
they are made from caramel gelato. 

Too, the internet today houses hundreds of 
thousands of walking videos, where somebody with a 
camera strapped to their chest moves about an English 
country lane or a Korean midnight metropolis, giving a 
first-person view of what it looks like to footfall those 
avenues. I have seen a video where somebody walks the 
same path that Friedrich Nietzsche used to hike when he 


moved to the coastal town of Eze on the French Riviera. 
You see, in a way, a version of what Nietzsche might 
have seen, with whatever changes to the flora that a 
hundred and forty years have had on the landscape 
there. Of course, we can't really see what Nietzsche saw 
on his walks, because our inner world is not the same as 
his, but it’s a nice idea. 

What sort of poetry will this ambient psycho- 
geography bring about, of a new generation walking 
through virtual landscapes, where the ground is not 
uneven or level, but groundless. How will the pace of 
our phrasing be altered, has already been altered, and 
what will it do to memory and daydreaming. Already it 
provides a way to displace, to speculate on, our position 
in time, kneeling down in Kotohira and admiring a gar- 
den bed hologram of chrysanthemum that resets and 
loops every few minutes, forever now, for a while. What 
I hope is that the impact on us is completely unexpected 
and, more than this, feels utterly wrong. Art that works 
is art that fails, because intentions are arrows that hit 
when they miss. It is the accidents that resonate with us 
because the human element is subtracted - the revelation 
is in the breach. 

In kinship with this consideration, this invitation 
for error, in parenting and in time, holding a hand 
younger than mine, with best foot forward, I begin. 


The thing I like most about quiet, open, brutalist 
spaces like this, the TAFE here, exploring it with my son 
on a Saturday morning, his two-year-old little mind and 
body spontaneously engaging with the concrete stairs and 
ramps and sudden brick facades in a manner that gives 
language now to what I most like about being here, is that 
spaces like this seem more like a playground than a 
purpose-built playground. 

They proffer genuine exploration in the root sense 
of the word, originally a hunter's term - to release a loud 
cry - from the Latin ex 'out' and from plorare 'to weep, 
cry', scouting an area by shouting aloud. But also how we 
get plorare from pluere as in 'to flow', which is what my 
son and I are doing here, walking across a slight brick 
elevation where two flagless poles are planted, onto a 
concrete walkway that curves between two sheer brick 
walls that rise from the mushrooms at their feet to the thin 
cloud streaks at their apogee, everything here made from 
either brick or concrete, until we find our way to the back 
of a building that seems to host education in metal forging. 

There are metal tables, metal tubs filled with 
dozens of offcuts of solid metal cylinders and something 
the shape of a road bump, or perhaps not a road bump so 
much as a mantle clock, raised supports for the metal 
cylinders that my son and I roll along the ground and into 
puddles left by an overnight storm. This is how we play, 
how we flow, and while we don’t cry aloud as we scout 
the area, preferring instead to talk gently to each other, 


21 


there is something to this etymology of the word explore 
that speaks to me - to weep, cry - not out of any sort of 
explicit sadness, but of a melancholy that takes residence 
with empathy, the way that memory is a bittersweet 
device, treating you to a remembrance of things past while 
reminding you that this is also where they live now, in an 
ever-fading capacity. 


This is why I take so many photos when my son 
and I explore together, as many photos of him in the 
environment as the environment itself, but never of me, 
not a fan of the selfie. I try to capture a view of what I see 
when I feel grateful for consciousness, when I recognise 
how much this particular moment in time fits me like a 
glove. Watching my son roll metal cylinders across a 


22 


bitumen embankment into puddles filled with clouds, this 
is the shape of my mind cupping its hemisphere-like- 
hands together as empathy is poured in. And, because our 
hands are poor vessels for holding liquid it flows out 
between the crevices, hence why I take so many photos, to 
hold time in a state of suspended animation before the 
moment passes. 

It feels to me that photography was not an accident 
but rather a decision made long ago within the structure of 
our brain. One-and-a-half million years ago when our 
brains developed a frontal lobe we learned how to reflect 
on our reality. The frontal lobe created a buffer between 
mind and matter, a delay between our unfiltered contact 
with the real and the way we subjectively process it 
through replay, our entire conscious experience of the 
world simply a reproduction of what has just occurred out 
there, earlier, in the unprocessed world beyond the 
language of our awareness. How could we not create 
photography to simulate this, just as we created dance, art, 
music and narrative before it, to synthesise this feeling. 
The brain said J am a replay machine, so let us create 
another machine that can replay the replay, over and over 
again, to duplicate the duplicates, and it was done. 

When I take a quick glance through the photos 
geotagged to the location of the TAFE, I see six hundred 
and fifty-five results that fall into the following categories: 
photos of my son riding around the empty car parks (we 
only ever go when the campus is closed, like on a Sunday 


23 


morning or public holidays); photos of my dog careening 
around the footpaths; photos of the grass strip that divides 
one side of the campus from a creek beside it, a creek 
birthed by way of a metal filter that halts the flow of 
detritus from the drain that precedes it some twenty metres 
to the south east, the grass strip containing a wooden 
bench seat and tables that we, my son and I, sometimes 
take a break on; photos of the train line on the other side 
of the campus taking coal carriages back and forth from 
the loader at the port through here to the mines up north; 
photos of my son and occasionally my dog exploring the 
courtyards of buildings, spaces of infinite calm, tracts of 
concrete and grass necklaced by five-storey boxes of how 
many hundred thousand bricks (I think of those who spent 
months of their lives here placing one brick on top of 
another in such perfect sequence, a bricklayer who 
recently did some work for our family, brought out of 
retirement for one or two more jobs because, in his words, 
he is one of the few who still take pride in the job, who 
doesn’t drop tools and speed away when the clock stops 
and couldn’t care less what has been left behind, not that 
this is a comment on the current young cohort of builders, 
he says, it was the same in his day too, back in the 
seventies there were the ones who turned their back on a 
sloppy, unfinished job the moment they got a chance to hit 
the beach, not that he hasn’t occasionally done that 
himself or got himself in a bit of trouble over time, the 
time he walked off a site and went AWOL for a couple of 


24 


days, drove down south to the snow to do some fishing in 
the lakes there, took how many cases of beer with him, 
fell asleep outside and would have frozen out there except 
for the immense need to urinate that woke him, and as he 
stood and relieved himself he looked up at the night sky 
and saw more stars in one place than he had ever seen in 
his life, and as intoxicated as he was he knew that those 
were a field of suns up there on some unintelligibly grand 
scale, and when he later returned home he felt an 
exhaustion in every part of his being like he’d never felt 
before which did not leave him for two years, so weary 
that he could not work for that whole time, so he took the 
phone off the hook and he and his wife survived on 
vegetables from their dusty little garden for twenty-four 
months before one day his energy returned, filling up his 
body again like an oven stoked with birch, and now here 
he is, still at it today, for one or two more jobs at the very 
least), and in the photographs of the courtyards I feel again 
the cool of the shadows, what I sometimes describe to 
myself as triangles of shade, always a relief across the 
Summer months when the TAFE is closed for nearly six 
straight weeks and we come here most mornings; photos 
of the grandstand that looks over the football oval where 
we climb up and down across the long timber benches, 
where I prompt my son to not climb on the corrugated 
roofing sheets that you can just walk straight out on from 
up here; and photos of the bridge that spans the creek in a 
midpoint between both sides of the campus, the fracture in 


25 


the closed system that allows the outside world into this 
quiet synthetic urban bubble, although to be fair their is a 
three-metre tall gate on the bridge that is almost always 
locked, especially when we are here during public holi- 
days and weekends, and although we respect the role of 
the gate, riding up to it and bumping against it, making the 
metal gate rattle against the metal railings of the bridge so 
that it reverberates against the buildings here like a 
dissonant gong, percussively celebrating its function, there 
are others in the area who walk up to the gate and vault 
over it in order to make their way from the suburb on one 
side of the TAFE through to the other, as it is by far the 
most direct path to cross the area rather than walking all 
the way around the neighbouring streets, waiting for the 
train gates, and so on. Unless you were to walk up the dry 
part of the creek-turned-drain, which I often do alongside 
my dog, without my son. 


26 


The point at which the riverrun creek transitions 
into a dry, walkable storm-water drain is located beneath a 
rail bridge that carries both freight and passenger trains 
(but not coal, which travels on the other side of the TAFE 
for a brief moment before diverting to the highfields). My 
dog is comfortable with the rumble now as the trains pass 
overhead as we trespass the drain's broad, curved tra- 
jectories from one side of the city to the other. We don’t 
start here, though. Our walk commences two kilometres 
back, two of the over five hundred kilometres of drain 
network across the city, expanding and contracting to 
varying degrees of width. The stretch we walk spans 
twenty metres across, but it narrows to only three or four 
metres as it slinks into the heights of the suburbs. Aside 
from a couple of bridges the drain is completely open air, 
seated some three metres below ground level with steep 
concrete walls, appearing somewhat like a baking tray or a 
marble run. 

I first guided my dog down here after reading a 
book by a local author about his own walks through the 
drain with his dog. The book was written in the style of 
the English naturalists, the walking phenomenologists who 
made it their mission and their pleasure to observe the 
area in which they lived in service of folk scientific 
inquiry, learning the names of the plants, the variety of 
birds flitting about, recognising seasonal patterns. There is 
a section in the book where the author wanders beneath a 
fold of torn metal fencing into the disused gasworks that 


27 


runs alongside the storm-water drain, and he says that if 
asked by any remnant security or council workers why he 
was trespassing, he would simply say that his dog ran 
through the fence and that he was just going in to retrieve 
him. That was enough of a license for me to do the same. 

Putting aside the joy of watching my dog run free 
through the length of drain as far as my vision carries, in 
which we have never in my years of doing this come 
across another dog down here, and only very occasionally 
another human traveller, my favourite part of the trek is a 
length of some five hundred metres that curves out of 
view from the nearest bridge or roadway, not visible from 
the rail line either, so that for some ten minutes of walking 
it is as if I am the only human on the planet. It is a sol- 
ipsist’s dream - on one side is the abandoned gasworks, on 
the other an abandoned fuel depot, both vacant of any 
activity, and growing along the ridge of the walls of the 
drain are these immense golden willows that hang low 
their branches and rustle like a nineteen-fifties mesh coin 
purse that softly pleat coins of jangled sunlight. 
Sometimes I lean back and watch the trees repeat their 
breeze-jostled sequence for twenty minutes while my dog 
finds a warm patch of ground to embrace. 

One early morning some weeks back, beneath just 
this sort of gentle acceleration of sunlight, my dog and I 
clambered up the concrete walls of the drain at a point 
where a minor stormwater course joins up with the central 
passage and found ourselves on a raised spit of field that 


28 


backs onto the old gasworks. Not only backs onto but 
leads into, as a nearby security gate is wide open within 
the surrounding mesh fence line. Until the nineteen- 
eighties, the gasworks turned coal, through an oxidation 
process, into gas for the city. Now it sits vacant, a half 
dozen silos casting shadows over bullgrass and dust like a 
batch of giant, discarded sundials. Most of the stairwells 
attached to the side of the silos are wholly rusted away, 
but one remains intact, enough so that my dog and I can 
ascend to the top without any hassle. 

On top of the silo I feel a sudden sensation to 
recline on its flat concrete lid and close my eyes, my 
dog already doing the same beside me, in a gesture that 
I can only describe as being analogously triggered by 
another mirrored circumstance some months prior. At 
that time I was, again, walking with my dog down the 
drain but in the opposite direction, towards an area 


29 


surrounded by sporting facilities. It was coming into 
twilight, but the sun was in a similar position to now, 
just on the opposite side of the sky, falling instead of 
rising. My dog leapt up the sides of the drain to get to 
the grass up there, preferring its soft texture beneath his 
paws after all that concrete, and when I followed him up 
I saw we were on a bank of turf behind a fence at the 
back of a soccer field. Soccer season was over for the 
year and the grounds were empty and inactive, but just 
like the gasworks, a security gate within the mesh fence 
had been left open. So, we walked in. 

The grass was dry and wispy. It looked like it 
had been some weeks since it was last mown, and 
perhaps this unkempt appraisal beckoned my dog to 
freely bound around its quadrant. The soccer field is at 
the back of another sporting field, which is at the back 
of a tennis facility, so it is out of view of public 


30 


thoroughfare when not in use. This is not an excuse to 
just let a dog run around a private sporting facility, nor 
an excuse to wander into an abandoned gasworks, but 
sometimes moral problems give way to aesthetic 
solutions, especially when ambient evening light presses 
its weight over an expanse such as this. It had been a 
long day and a long month, and as I wandered onto the 
middle of the pitch, I sat down, looked up at the 
extinguished stadium lights, and thought about how 
peaceful it would be to fall back into the grass and go to 
sleep there. I woke up some two hours later in the dark, 
with a back pocket full of calls from my wife. 

Forty or so minutes (who is counting) after 
deciding to recline on the top of the old silo, I opened 
my eyes and realised that the same thing had happened 
again, just as on the soccer field - I thought it would be 
nice to have a rest in an empty public space and 
unknowingly, without anticipation, fall asleep, but who 
would have thought I would see it through. I woke up 
facing the sky with a start and gripped the roof of the 
silo with clamped fingers, worried I was nearer the edge 
than I actually was. Slowly turning my head to the side, 
I locked eyes with my dog as he began reading my 
expression, which I immediately softened so as to not 
cause him any undue distress. Beyond his curled form, 
big brown bucket of fluff that he is, I looked across the 
pitched rooftops of nearby factories and warehouses, 
across the rail line, to the TAFE where I could see the 


31 


quarters my son and I covered there, from the creek to 
the car park, from one magnitude of bricks to another to 
the courtyards in their wake. 

Gazing across a broad expanse of geography fills 
me with a sense of pending internal completeness. 
When you sit on the beach and look out to the ocean or 
sit on a porch and look across a field towards a distant 
mountain range - is the attraction a physical one, a 
resonance with symmetry, scale and colour, the lines of 
the environment, an impetus to action. Or rather, is it a 
metaphysical attraction, rendering the ocean and the 
field as metaphors, as an architecture of poetics that 
conjure feelings of freedom, infinity, the purity of 
faultless nature, and our kinship by association. 

I have come to think of my relationship with 
landscape as one of subphysicality, beneath conscious 
association and physical connection, within enclaves of 
unintelligibility in a manner that positions these land- 
scapes as analogous to the shape of the inland empire 
that is my subjectivity. These landscapes are not 
analogous in an abstract form within my mind; instead, 
they exist as my mind - subject as object. To look from 
the ceiling of the gas silo across an expanse of grassland 
and industry is to recognise the literal chemical, 
electrical silhouette of my own awareness. Environ- 
mental declivities and ascensions are carved into the 
fabric of my consciousness as into an inverted mirror, 
allowing landscape to pour into the negative space at the 


32 


foothold of my thoughts, providing to the body a 
simulation of what division without remainder might 
feel like. 

During a recent afternoon at the TAFE, while my 
son and I were going up and down a stairwell that leads 
to a storage corridor beneath one of the buildings, I 
spotted a lady, in her sixties say, five foot-something, 
wiry and postured forthright, dressed in dark materials 
with patches of purple and green that I associate with 
tapestry, and what I saw her do was circle one of the 
gum trees standing fifty metres from where my son and 
I were on the stairwell, and she took a long eye-level 
gaze at the trunk of the tree before walking over to it, 
turn to face the other way, and let her body fall back 
into the tree where, somehow, her body perfectly fit. I 
had not looked at the tree previously, but based on what 
I was seeing, it appears that in one side of the tree there 
was a gap, perhaps where the tree had rotted away and 
left an inclination, that cupped her body as if she was 
born out of that very tree. When I saw her enact this 
scene, I thought, that’s right, landscape as analogy, 
subject as object, she and the tree are two connected 
parts of a whole. She is the framework of subjectivity 
and the tree is the external world forged from its cast. 

To talk about landscape and nature is to talk about 
oneself indirectly. Possibly it is the only manner in which 
to talk about oneself that is not socially repulsive. What 
I’m doing here, with this sort of writing and thinking 


33 


about walking, is initiating the technology through which I 
escape from populated society. I enjoy living in the city, 
but I tend to believe that a city reaches its functional peak 
once it becomes empty of people. Well, so long as it leaves 
for my son and me to talk its silent quarters, where the city 
becomes an instrument, and the sunlight that forms 
triangles beneath our footfalls the bow with which it is 
played, resonating ghost songs that are, of course, love 
songs in their most pure form. 

The TAFE, in its small, closed system intimacy, is 
a postage stamp compared with the city of Newcastle, 
which expands like a pop-up picture book from the 
paper’s edge on the north side of the TAFE. The dry 
storm-water drain that nestles here transitions with an 
abundance of water into Throsby Creek, a passage of 
industrial discharge that is, through local effort, becoming 
a little cleaner and more ecologically friendly each year. 
As a mark of this environmental progress, bull sharks have 
been spotted in the creek recently, the first in nearly a 
century since the last recorded shark attack was recorded 
there. A pathway that runs parallel to Throsby Creek takes 
you to where the Hunter River takes over, which, in our 
pop-up picture book, would be represented by a blue fold 
of paper structured not unlike a cathedral (in the same 
manner that Bach composed many of his late period organ 
pieces to structurally mirror the geometry of the churches 
they were to be performed in - the Hunter River at this 
juncture is steeped in a trajectory that could carry a bridal 


34 


party down the aisle with the groom’s family on the 
ballast forged island where the coal ships unload, and the 
bride’s on the mainland). 

There is a public art sculpture along here that uses 
a sturdy foam material, painted blue, with a white sphere 
in the middle, to resemble undulating ripples of water 
moving out from the sphere. My son calls this sculpture 
‘the moon’, as in the moon has fallen in the water. It is 
perfect for climbing and rolling over. When our intentions 
are to head into Newcastle for the day, we often start at the 
moon (and, finish up at the beach, another analogy, ano- 
ther mirror, for what is the moon but a beach in space 
being cupped by the cosmic ocean, how the first 
astronauts wore the uniforms of deep-sea divers). 


Sometimes we see other children of a similar age 
to my son who stop here with their parents to play, and, at 
the risk of sounding like a parent who can only see his 
children through the keyhole of his pasture, I observe how 


35 


my son is often surprised by the antics of these other 
children. He doesn’t put a name to their behaviours in the 
same way I do — acts of deception, of street-wise trickery, 
of manipulation, of insider jokes that fuel a specific frame 
of intellectual and physical violence — but he does take 
noticeable stock of the difference in them compared to 
what he is used to, to me, in comparison with our own 
play. While my son and I build nests of trust out of 
familial servitude that fosters deep care between us, these 
other children build something different — a bridge away 
from home towards new learnings that I can’t replicate. 
Sure, that goes without saying, but they also bring a 
deprivation of innocence that my son still has in spades. 
This is because, other than growing up with his sister (ten 
years his elder), his experience with other children has not 
been plentiful at this point in his life. He sees them at 
playgrounds like this, of course, but he doesn’t attend 
daycare or preschool yet. Instead, he spends time with our 
family and, when I am not working, with me, exploring 
the rise and fall of mostly bare city quarters. 

On past the moon is the marina and the fisherman’s 
co-operative. We stop behind the big exhaust fans on the 
side of the shed where heavily coated men drag crates of 
yellowfin and roughy, and we are taken with laughter by 
the blow of the fans as they push our hair seaward. Up the 
road is the new Interchange where the rail line meets the 
tram line, an anachronism depending on who you talk to; 
the whole city was once covered in tram lines connecting 


36 


suburbs before they were taken up to make way for the 
future. Who could have seen that the future would direct 
the city to remove the inner-city tract of train rail and 
replace it with, guess what, another tram line, only this 
time it doesn’t connect the suburbs, it just goes up and 
down a spare kilometre of CBD. And then we have the 
trams themselves, in the beginning presented to the public 
wearing coats of crisp red and white paint draped across 
sleek mouldings, like a children’s toy given extra care 
during mass production, only to then some weeks on have 
another coat folded around them - plastic wrapped 
advertisements for the coal mining industry, for car 
insurance, for banks. As you peer through the slits of 
transparency in the advertisements to the interior of the 
tram cars and see the mostly vacant seats, it is apparent 
what the real value of these city assets are. 

But those are the words of an adult cynic and do 
not reflect the feelings of my city companion. My son’s 
favourite tram is the one advertising a new kind of milk - 
‘there it is, the milk tram’, he calls out as he sees it float 
from behind the boxing gymnasium into the clearway. The 
milk tram is an exciting piece of moving art that combines 
so many of my son’s most revered preferences (mostly his 
love of milk and public transport), and it brings about 
another favourite experience, watching the signal crossing 
lights shine into action and listening to their metronomic 
ding. Now that I realise what the milk tram means to my 
son, I temper my criticisms, not because my complaints 


37 


are wrong, but because they’re a bit gross in the light of 
other perspectival shades. It reminds me that at times I too 
love the trams, ads and all, when from a distance I see 
their evening lights trace a line through the city like a 
vintage educational animation of electricity flowing up a 
circuit; and what about the lovers who have spent all night 
on the beach, slunk against each other in the otherwise 
empty carriage as morning sunlight smudges the glass 
terrarium that contains them and _ fosters _ their 
photosynthesis, twin piles of sand at their feet; or the 
autonomous humanoid care drones, en route for aged care 
lunchtime visitations, comfortably seated, vibing in 
ambient defragmentation, screen savers displaying health 
care practices, recommended sleep schedules; or for all 
that, how about the lack of trams, the inversion of their 


38 


presence, on that one day when they were all locked away 
for compliance auditing and I walked the tracks, the white 
salted concrete tongue that rolls between hotels and 
bridges, drains and hospitals and art deco balustrades, 
theatres turned cinemas turned churches turned wasteland 
tundra, the last antique shop on the street, a custom 
electronics repair store that I took a broken MiniDisk 
player once, and a host of other sites and assorted memory 
prompts that I’d never previously had the opportunity to 
observe on foot from this vantage, a psychogeography 
born out of the temporary absence of trams, a non-place 
turned place for a little while. 

The wedding district beyond the Interchange 
unfurls in snow-laced matrices across old multi-storey 
buildings, some with sheer glass facades that shimmer in 
laden dust light bearing rows of white dresses lined up on 
mannequins, looking from this angle like a giant game of 
Connect Four if all the disks were the same colour. Other 
buildings wear art deco concrete rendered caps painted 
salmon and tangerine, housing beneath them a couple of 
eateries peppered along the street that, ontologically 
speaking, only seem to vaguely exist at certain hours of 
the day and week. Around the corner is a pub not long in 
business, just opened before the pandemic. During 
lockdown they served supersized cocktails to people on 
the street, daiquiris in vases, ouzo in juice bottles, which 
someone commented was very European, although that 
seems a stretch. 


39 


A block up from here is a government building. 
They deal with where you can and can't dig, I believe. It is 
a structure made almost entirely of sand-toned 
pebblecrete, from the floors to the walls, and there are 
accessibility ramps that wrap around the building in all 
directions, a dream for my son to run and leap across, not 
unlike like a multi-storey hedge maze. We always end up 
here when no workers are around, probably on weekend 
mornings. My son likely thinks these buildings don't 
actually contain anything - no people, no objects - that 
they are shells like a fort made from cardboard, just walls, 
floor, and air, a space to be climbed over with no other 
function. 

From here, we will often head to Civic Park, a 
stretch of parkland facing a doughnut-shaped building that 
was once our old Town Hall. The park sits at the feet of 
our city library and art gallery, the crucible of public 
frustration at one point after a row of fig trees that lined 
the street between the park and the library were set for 
removal by the city council. Environmental reports 
claimed weak root systems and risk of falling branches, 
while others gestured towards plans the council had to 
commercialise the space the figs currently occupied. After 
many months of protest and security guards patrolling the 
figs day and night to ensure no acts of urban terrorism 
were carried out, the figs were removed. A couple of years 
later, and I mention this with no political motive, a 
massive storm hit Newcastle and, ridiculously, I took to 


40 


my car with a camera to photograph the damage being 
wrought across the city, finding telegraph poles being 
thrown around, rooftops ejected from buildings like 
smokestacks casting off their lids, and a host of fig trees, 
dozens of those that remained in the surrounding streets, 
plucked out of the ground and dropped onto cars and 
homes. All told, hundreds of trees across the city were 
prone to the same demise. It was such a peculiar 
phenomenon to observe as so many fell in the same way - 
footpaths folded back onto themselves in waves of grass, 
the gravity of the fallen tree having activated this fold, 
resembling one of those books for young readers where 
you peel back layers to see the internal workings of earth 
and machinery. 


oS 
ny 
ras 


41 


Back at Civic Park, there is a large fountain - a 
water feature really, structured around a sculptural piece 
of decimated stone. It has been reported that during World 
War Two a secret plan was developed that, in the event of 
invading troops ever making it to Newcastle and being in 
a position to take control of our smelting facilities, a 
sequence of explosions could be initiated from the top of 
town to flatten the city, rendering our factories, our entire 
infrastructure, impossible to be weaponised against the 
rest of the country. This fountain sculpture is, to my eyes, 
a vision of what might be left of Newcastle after this self- 
destruction was actioned, a broken symphony of 
splintered rock consumed by ocean waves. However, as 
with the milk trams, this is not what my little friend sees. 
He sees a motorised water toy set to motion by an engine 
room that sparks infinite curiosity. Some fifteen metres 
from the fountain, a narrow staircase of some dozen steps 
descend into the earth, becoming ever noisier, leading to a 
metal door we have never seen open. This must, we 
conclude, lead to the controls and the motor that keep the 
fountain running, although what sits behind the door is 
ultimately a mystery to both of us. A mystery we joyfully 
return to, week after week. 

The next patch of town we wander into is where 
remembered dreams of my boyhood start to take form, 
where my steps from thirty years ago begin to overlap, 
ghost-like, with those of my son. A curve on King and 
Hunter Street brings about an old cinema that has been 


42 


sitting empty for many years. You can look through the 
windows at movie posters from the last decade, a time 
capsule left unburied. I loved to go here as a lad, the dark 
carpet, the heavy burgundy curtains, the firm leather seats 
with the gold tacks holding everything in place. 
Occasionally I wonder what it would take to get inside 
and look around. But not now, not with my son. I 
remember my father telling me how many cinemas, 
“picture palaces’, used to exist around town. He and his 
mates would get on their bikes and, for some fractional 
coin currency no longer in circulation, would visit several 
across a single day, seeing a different cowboy movie at 
each. The original cinema buildings held Wurlitzer organs 
and orchestras, replaced over time by an empty field of 
space between the big screen and the first row of chairs 
where young children run around when they get bored, a 
non-space like those trams tracks without trams, an 
inversion of solid form, a lady cradling her body into the 
divot of a tree, a ghost song that disintegrates all memory 
of its melody upon waking up, realising that thirty years 
hence have brought you back here again. 

Memories are never singular but rather always in 
the plural. There is no single memory, like an individual 
card pulled from a deck, but instead they exist as a 
multitude that fan out and lay across each other, like petals 
of a particularly transparent quality, the light of attentive 
recollection filtering through their combined hues. It is as 
if film negatives were laid one on top of the other to create 


43 


an entirely new composite scene. Those individual scenes 
do not exist - only the assembled collage is real. The piling 
up of old memories produces new ones, forever changing 
how we see the past, like when we hear news about a 
neighbour that permanently alters our every perception of 
them. The past is always a spontaneous product of the 
present, constructed in an instant of reflection - not a 
chance use of the term, reflection - the surface of our mind 
bouncing light against the smudged layers of our plate 
glass memories, mirroring back to us a scene never before 
depicted that looks like something we’ve always known. 

I remember the Angus Steak House a block up and 
across the road from the cinema. It housed a model train 
track pinned alongside the internal wall of the restaurant, 
running from the kitchen to the booths of lucky diners that 
sat alongside the rail line, a steam train puffing to-and-fro 
hauling carriages that gripped plates of warm garlic bread. 
I remember too another little train (ever the enthusiast, 
like my little man) on a track suspended around a tall iron 
pillar in a shopping arcade just a bit further up the street. 
The track ran through a mantle clock on one side of the 
rail and beneath a heavy bell suspended opposite. If my 
memory is correct, I believe the train used to sit within a 
tunnel cut inside the base of the mantle clock until the 
hands hit the hour mark. At this time, the train would leave 
its tunnel and drive out and strike the bell somehow (did 
the momentum of something attached to the train drive 
beneath the bell and hit it as it passed, or was it something 


44 


more mechanical striking the bell, or did it actually hit the 
bell at all - the arcade was within a clear audible trajectory 
of the clock at Town Hall that strikes every hour, perhaps 
the bell was just ornamental and what we were actually 
hearing was the Town Hall bell). 


As we walk this quarter, disintegrating with every 
step as multistory car-parks are replaced with apartment 
buildings, department stores replaced with apartment 
buildings, old apartment buildings replaced with 
apartment buildings (everywhere to live and nowhere to 
go), I experience a projected Proustian moment where I 
believe I can smell biscuits from the Cookieman section 
of David Jones, surely twenty years since it existed, not 
within my daughter’s thirteen year life-span at the very 


45 


least or I would have taken her there to taste the jam drop 
shortbread, the biscuits with the yellow or green or red 
coloured lollies, the dotty cookies with chocolate buttons 
covered in hundreds and thousands that they used to call 
‘jewels’. I used to go there with my parents, my mother, 
when I was say seven or eight, to select a biscuit when I 
was in the vicinity. The whole David Jones building was 
special, I remember twenty years hence Christmas season 
when my wife and I would go there for family gifts, the 
beautiful displays of jewellery, books, clothing, the only 
real store in the city for these sort of purchases, thirty 
kilometres from the nearest massive suburban shopping 
centres that have come to dominate the period. I used to 
walk the car-park alone on a weekend morning, winding 
up the on-ramps, overlooking the city, the harbour, the old 
abandoned Victoria Theatre. 

And then the whole place shut down. One 
earthquake was it all it took to dismantle the history of the 
CBD and send the future out to the suburbs. David Jones 
sealed off its doors with sheets of plywood, a process of 
memory evacuation initialised to make room for non- 
memories, new spaces that don’t harbour the unseemly 
noise of active remembrance. And yet of course some 
noise was left behind, not only within my own skull but 
within the artistic pursuits of local talents, one oil painter, 
a UK emigrant like so many of our best local creatives, 
who gained access to the internal corridors of the David 
Jones building, the expansive tiled zones where 


46 


whitegoods and children’s clothing were once stationed 
beneath mighty air conditioning ducts, captured now in 
poppyseed and walnut, impasto slabs of dust, of collapsed 
shelving, of stacked chairs and cash registers left fallen in 
a corner pile, of arched windows looking out to the sea, 
yet when you press your face to the canvas the windows 
show nothing, no world behind the painted portal, like the 
wall of a memory that says no more data available, a 
visualisation of the voice on the old cassette tape that says 
‘this is the end of Side A, turn the tape over’ to restart the 
memory from the beginning, or rather not the beginning 
but the other side, with a younger version of yourself. 

I mentioned UK emigrants just now because it’s 
curious how many of the local artists and writers who 
most inspire the way I consider Newcastle came from the 
Isles. The author I referenced at the outset who wrote 
about following his dog into the gasworks as a subterfuge 
for his own explorations, the artist above who paints the 
remnant scenery of expired department stores, and another 
artist who created an illustrated catalogue of a hundred 
mailboxes from around these streets and the streets of my 
home, who draws the same ephemera disjecta that draws 
me in too, the bent wire fences of the velodrome, the 
anonymous walls of how many bricks that comprise the 
telephone exchange, the foliage of fig trees cut through the 
middle by the council to make room for powerlines 
passing through, they burrow into the globe of leaves 
turning full circles into caves, like the cave of the mantle 


47 


clock the little track would wait in for the hour mark (I’ve 
just remembered more on this, it was not the train that 
struck the bell, but rather there was the figure of a miner 
on a cart pulled behind the train that would strike the bell 
with a pick axe), like the metal offcuts found at the TAFE. 

There are more UK artists that come to mind as 
well, a photographer who would, until 2018, capture 
similar scenes as just recounted and post them online, and 
a local historian I became friends with who moved here in 
her seventies and began researching the place in order to 
connect more deeply with her new home, to understand it 
a way that some locals might but most do not, com- 
pensation in a way for being the outsider. I wonder if it is 
a result of being in a new, yet not completely unfamiliar, 
environment that sparks the creative urge to connect and 
render a new home in a way that fosters a synthesised 
familiarity there, or rather perhaps it is that travellers can 
bring with them their own particular enterprising skills, 
particularly artisan capacities, that gesture them into 
writing books and painting canvases about what else but 
the streets they wander every morning as they take stock 
of where they have ended up. 

Travel for me was never something I yearned for, 
even as my close friends began making plans towards the 
end of high school, during university, to go to Europe or 
explore South-East Asia. I dug my heels in, what more 
could you want than what we have here, take a look 
around, the entire universe is stationed in Newcastle, like 


48 


that Kafka quote about how you don’t need to go to exotic 
locations to find the world, you just have to put yourself at 
your desk, still and alone, and the whole world will offer 
itself up to you. That being said, when I did start to travel 
as part of work opportunities I relished the new 
experiences. On my first overseas trip for a conference in 
Bali I couldn’t quite believe I was standing on the ground 
of another country, across an ocean, an entirely different 
land mass. I still feel the uncanny sensation today, ten 
years on, recalling how I turned back on the Denpasar 
runway to see the Indian Ocean in a mist of afternoon 
cyan wonder. After being driven to the conference centre 
in the grove of some stunning tropical paradise, I 
immediately transgressed the work health and safety 
governance of the trip by leaving the boundaries of the 
location. I can remember pushing through a thicket of 
dense palms fronds on the edges of the venue and finding 
a cow in a wooden cage there, and beyond this some 
paved steps that lead up to a cliffside restaurant, not open 
at the time and possibly closed for the season, where a 
little collared dog, speckled with black stripes on his 
caramel head and back, came up and followed me around. 
Wherever I travelled across the following decade, I always 
seemed to stumble into the same sort of solitary quarters I 
favour at home. 


In New Zealand it was midnight in Christchurch, 
not long after the terrible earthquake that devastated the 
city, walking around the dozens of public artworks erected 


49 


to commemorate the event and provide a space for 
community and memory to harmonise. I remember giant 
lounge chairs made from astroturf, a tower of 
multicoloured shipping containers, miniature golf courses 
with plastic funnels connecting holes between the 
remnants of fallen church domes, and those few remaining 
buildings wrapped in brown paper, like a bandage, on 
immense vacant plots of land. In China, it was arriving 
beneath a Christmas tree at the Peace Hotel in the Bund 
region in the middle of the night, and minutes later 
dreaming that I had missed the plane to China only to 
shock myself out of sleep and realise all was well, I was 
there. A walk through Old Shanghai after breakfast 
beneath immense coils of electrical cables suspended from 
the corners of stone block businesses, sharing the 


50 


alleyways with little dogs wearing ballet shoes and tutus. 
Unable to find my way across the Huangpu River, I kept 
taking the sightseeing tunnel tour that puts you in a 
futuristic pod and shoots you from one side of the river to 
the other through a rainbow grid of lights, with an 
accompanying voiceover that describes that geological 
formation of the earth. Later, in Songjiang, I slept in a 
hospital for a week and walked the surrounding fields 
during the day. I visited a shopping centre one afternoon 
only to find that all the shops were an illusion - all the 
shopfronts were painted with pretend bakeries and 
bookstores. They were positioned beneath the shadow of 
infinitely replicated apartment buildings, fifty storeys 
high, which had, near the access gates at their base, little 
red signs bearing an illustration of Lenin on them with a 
red cross over the top, no Leninists allowed. I saw a little 
schoolhouse on one of my walks, a kilometre or two from 
a hotel wearing large sculpted letters reading GOLF on its 
front, that I tried without success to find later on a digital 
map. When I took a photo of the schoolhouse from a 
distance, it was a lovely scene positioned amongst an 
intersection of hill, field, river and empty superhighway, 
but the photo has since been lost. 

When I visited Dubai, a place built for the touristic 
experience, I inadvertently found myself again in 
peopleless spaces. After learning that Dubai was not a 
walkable city, I asked a taxi to take me to where I thought 
was a spice souk was located, but the directions I gave 


51 


took me to a barren waterfront area with flat tangerine- 
toned buildings that housed art galleries and museum 
attractions, all closed while I was there. I walked the area 
for two hours and found a rotating teacup ride, not in use, 
a wet floor sign in the shape of a banana, a statue of a 
robot made out of folded sheets of tin, and a river that 
seemed to display, across the water, a mirror image of the 
sights found here. Besides the taxi driver who dropped me 
off and another who picked me up, I didn’t see another 
person for the entire outing. 

There were similar experiences in South Africa 
and Singapore — flying into major cities, but where are the 
people, how did I end up in the only empty quarter. This 
further stoked in me the joy of travelling somewhere new 


52 


and, during the period before or after my work com- 
mitments, walking the urban and semi-rural trajectories 
that took me to areas in which I felt like I’d fallen off the 
map, as if I’ve blinked and awaken in a parallel version of 
the place in which you’re the only remaining soul. It is the 
same around Australia — notably, recently, Deloraine in 
Tasmania (the rail line beside the timber mill, the 
suspension bridge over the river, platypus diving between 
duck feet), Wee Waa (the red fields with kangaroo tracks 
where Daft Punk once performed, enormous trucks 
carrying hay bales the size of houses) and Inverell (ghost 
mist on Winter morning streets, candelabra street lights 
becoming alchemical, turning liquid vapour into frenetic 
gold sparks) in New South Wales, and just the other month 
to Glenelg in South Australia, where I travelled and left 
my home for the first time since my son was born, 
previously excused from doing so by flight bans during 
pandemic lockdown. I wrote a poem about processing 
being absent from him, of which the first couple of stanzas 
(in which, like a moth, I’m forever spellbound by light of 
any sort), go: 


By the time I have arrived in the hotel room 
and pushed through the gauze curtains 

to see the sun, flat from this angle, sink within 
minutes behind its own ribbon of gauze, 

a distant cloudscape of embarrassed whisper, 

I am some half day absent your little face. 


53 


You turned three on Saturday, likely the first 
birthday that carried some resonance 

to seperate it from all the other playful days. 
But now I am here with you over there, 

the first time since your birth that work travel 
has become inescapable, try as I have. 


To fight the grief when you are not pressed 
to me tonight, not ‘morrow on bikes to 

spin off into isometric concrete wonders, 

I have committed to take witness re: 

what is in your father's head (at thirty eight) 
as I footfall this beachside destination, 


as I see this sun fall into the ocean, I swear 
it flickered like a light bulb on a bad 
circuit, backlighting clouds when it touched 
down into the ocean. Tomorrow the 
newspapers will talk about an energy crisis 
with not enough power on the grid, 


not a coincidence in my eyes, just like the 
skyline here painted in vibrant hues, it 

is not saturated by chance, no - these reds, 
akin your highly oxygenated blood 
spilled through so many skinned knees, 
they glow via Tongan volcanic dust. 


54 


Some of the road trips my wife and I took together, 
before our son was born and when our daughter was old 
enough to stay with family for a couple of nights, reveal a 
counterpoint between the kind of solitary spaces that 
urbanism brings in comparison with more pastoral 
locations. On one of our drives up north, we stopped at 
Bowling Alley Point and took a stroll up Peel River from 
the Chaffey Dam. It began to rain, and we had to refuge in 
a little weatherboard church on a hill (the roof of our car 
had a bad leak and gave no shelter). Inside, bathed in faint 
lemon rainlight that struggled to cast through a dusty 
window arched around a depiction of a fallen gum tree, we 
found a crossword puzzle in a newspaper beside the pulpit 
that we completed with a golf scorecard pencil. Back in 
the car, with towels on the seats, we ascended a mountain 
range, the name of which I cannot recall. When we 
reached the top, we pulled the car over to examine a 
kaleidoscope of tiny green butterflies that were, to my 
wife’s concern, hovering over the edge of the mountain 
(she didn’t feel they should risk being over such a high 
vertical drop, even though it seemed visually impossible to 
consider that their infinitely buoyant jostling would ever 
cease). I thought I could hear water lapping somewhere 
nearby, behind the car perhaps, and after we marched 
through some hundred metres of bushland away from the 
edge of the mountain, we found a tree-lined lake. It must 
have just been rainfall in an immense basin, like a 
volcanic crater, but it was stunning to stand and look at, 


55 


thinking about how high up it was, very nearly amongst 
the clouds that filled it up. 

That night, we reached our accommodation in a 
small regional village, although not so small that it didn’t 
have a cinema in a hall with around twenty white plastic 
picnic chairs set up in front of the screen. It sort of looked 
like a movie drive-in had a house built around it. The thing 
that really got our attention, though, was the retro arcade 
attached to the side of the cinema, through an aluminium 
security door with a torn flyscreen, into a sunroom with 
four or five machines from forty years ago. I can’t 
remember them all except that we played Golden Axe 
together for a good hour and then took turns on a Volley 
pinball machine (we were thrilled by the real mechanical 
action of the bumpers, the chain reactions that caused an 
immediate snap reflex the moment one of the hypotenuse 
pads were hit by a ball, like when a doctor uses a little 
hammer on the tendon in your knee to make your leg kick 
up). 

So what is to be considered here about the 
aesthetic differences, or rather what I described earlier as a 
subphysicality, analogous to the shape of the inland 
empire of my _ subjectivity, that these different 
environments elicit - the riparian scrubland tundra of 
Bowling Alley Point (I always think of Salinger’s 
unpublished story ‘An Ocean Full of Bowling Balls’), the 
butterflies and the crater filled with rainwater, compared 
with the built environment, the cinema and the arcade, the 


56 


rows of white plastic chairs. Is there a difference, or are 
they the same environments but on separated points on a 
singular timeline - one day, there is a pinball machine; the 
next, it is a gravel path that, when you kick a particular 
rock, the ground reflexively jolts the rock right back at 
you. Or perhaps both spaces fulfil different solitary needs. 
The built environment is a sign that someone was once 
there to build the place and had a reason for it to exist, 
even though it perhaps no longer serves a purpose. I think 
of that poem of Larkin’s where grass grows up through the 
floor of a church, deer now grazing there. Is it a post- 
human peace, an opportunity to enjoy the cultural 
remnants of humanity without people causing any further 
harm, aside from the witness there to see the last of it all, 
and if so, what does that say about me and my reasons for 
seeking these places out. It is easier to justify being alone 
with nature; it sounds so healthy, connecting with the 
biological heart of it all, the sunshine, the water, the 
peaceful pathways that let your mind disperse like the 
seeds of a dandelion. For me, the peak sensation of 
landscape is the fusion of these two spaces - the bomb 
shelter in the forest, the transmission towers amongst the 
wheat fields. And if you’ll excuse another poetic aside, 
thinking now about these scenes reminds me of a walk I 
took with my dog recently through just such an area, it 
goes: 


57 


There is always a hole in a fence, 
eventually, that someone else has made. 
Local hoodlums, is that still the word, 
anticipated my palliate arrival with pliers, 
somewhere to smoke or shoot up or shag, 
is that still a word, but I’m thankful all 
the same because there is nowhere else 
in the city or the neighbourhood, is that 
still a thing, to walk my dog today, for 
all the good spots are taken and I don’t 
trust him to be social with other dogs, 
the only real trick I’ve ever taught him. 


The fence hole is in an industrial 

estate still being established, there is an 
unused quarter, is that still a thing, where 
I watch my dog run through yellow grass, 
or not so much run as bound, is that the 
word because it seems like he’s doing the 
very opposite of being bound, because 
giving a dog the opportunity to run free is 
a handsome thing but also reminds you of 
how this instinct is mostly restricted, but 
not today my friend because just look at 
where we have managed to find ourselves: 


58 


northward is nothing but sky, 

I don’t mean straight above my head, 
although that is also nothing, I mean to 

the horizon, just some arm of a crane like 
a twig from this distance, it pivots in an arc 
like the gnomon of a sundial, pointing now 
towards the old gun barrel radio station on 
the hill that still distributes a signal, low 
powered, someone messing around with 
pirate frequencies, I know because I hear 
directions being read by a man wearing 
what sounds like a heavily pilled jumper. 


Transmission towers daisy 

chained by melancholy strings like 
Elgar would have liked seeing bowed, 
not heard necessarily, the visual would 
have been enough as it is now, seeing 
them become small as I back up towards 
the fence line, who knew the ground 
here would be so wet, is this what it has 
come to, seeking out sunken fields in a 
zone beyond the reason of townships, 
through a hole in a fence (ok I admit it 
was me who made the incision, is that 


still a thing, admission, admission 

into this area, but I jest), somewhere for 
my dog to go unfettered, to walk without 
neighbours, to see cranes and grass and 
power pylons and rusted buildings on 
the hill beneath Tuesday dry sunlight, 
and while we need to turn back because 
we have run out of solid ground, there 
will be another day when we will return, 
not phased by how messy this sludge 
wander was, the nettles from the grass 
pinned to us saying ‘take me with you’. 


That line towards the start of the poem, 'I don't 
trust him to be social with other dogs, the only real trick 
I've ever taught him' is nothing if not a confession of the 


60 


kind I mentioned at the outset with regards to the sort of 
social exclusion these places offer me when my son and I 
explore the city together. And I'll say something else on 
this, something of a revelation that has just come to me as 
I walk with my son down Watt Street (its actual name, not 
a reference to the Beckett novel), passing by a quiet 
building I've always wondered about, an ex-services club 
that I can't be sure is still in operation. My first thought on 
seeing the building is that sense of query, wanting to know 
more about the place, what it's like inside, and the lives of 
those who go into such a seemingly, to my narrow field of 
observation, unoccupied space. And from there, I consider 
how I can learn more about it - can I wander out the back 
and look at the car park, and what if I put my face up to 
the window to peer through the curtains, or perhaps I can 
loiter in the lobby for a moment if the front door ever 
opens. What has never occurred to me, at least not in these 
last couple of years, is that I could ask about becoming a 
member of this club. Why not - I'm a decent, law-abiding 
citizen (well, peering through windows aside) who can 
surely afford an annual membership to a place like this. So 
why is my first instinct that I'm not allowed inside. 

You could point to childhood factors, always a 
decent place to start. Some of my most cherished youthful 
memories are from when my parents took care of 
businesses after hours. As an only child, and one who 
didn’t contribute to the tasks my parents were involved in, 
I had time to myself for an evening to wander around 


61 


wherever we were - for a period, it was a local council 
Information Centre with a car park I used to explore, 
climbing on concrete barricades and brick walls, walking 
down a tree-lined street beside a holiday caravan park that 
faced a twilight beach. Later, a public library, waiting for 
the vast interior to replace void with light as the power 
came on. I would walk up and down the stairwells, push 
into study rooms and administration areas, look through 
the shelves (I remember I was around nine when I found a 
book on Jungian psychology and the Australian landscape, 
of which I understood absolutely nothing, and yet 
something gleaned from the front and back covers stuck 
with me like a talisman for future discovery). There are 
many other locations as well that flit across my memory - 
an early childcare centre where I handled the peeling 
boxes of board games (why do I think of those buildings 
in Christchurch when I remember this); a garden in which 
I ran down a steep grass declivity into a greenhouse filled 
with hanging orchids; the garage of a local boxing 
historian that contained a poem about the horrors of the 
Vietnam War. 

But is this really where my sensibility for tracts of 
urban solitude was developed, or is there a more visceral 
root. What about my stutter, significant as a child but less 
so now, what role did it play in all of this. Not necessarily 
as an isolating factor - it never stopped me from making 
friends - but what I believe it did do, and I think this is 
getting more to the heart of what I’m driving at here, is it 


62 


taught me about different routes to achieve an outcome. 
On the one hand, there are the temporal strategies that 
stuttering teaches you, that you need to have around four 
or five different sentence options in your head at any one 
time that you can quickly divert to in order to finish a 
thought in case the original sentence begins to fail you. 
But the more important lesson for me is stuttering teaches 
you that while you might not succeed by going down the 
first, most obvious route, there are other possibilities, and 
perhaps those other possibilities are more statistically in 
your favour. 

What do I mean by this - well, in class at school, you 
might not be able to provide an answer aloud to the 
teacher; but instead, you can ponder the solution for 
longer, keep it in your head to gestate, and then perhaps 
you write down the answer, not the answer you initially 
came up with but a more astute insight, developing a 
capacity for concentrated thought in lieu of being able to 
spontaneously get a response out of your mouth. I believe 
I intuited something from this position early on, the 
strategic options afforded to the outsider to find success 
via alternate paths. Instead of learning the piano, I learned 
the organ, a fast-track solution in some ways to standing 
out in your field (instead of being an average pianist 
amongst a sea of millions of other average pianists, you 
are an average organist in the sea of barely anybody else, 
and suddenly the word average doesn’t seem so fitting). 
Instead of teaching in a mainstream school, I taught in a 


63 


special education environment. Was this just a numbers 
game, striking better odds at getting a job in a less 
populated field, or was there something more to it, an 
allegiance to others outside the majority. ’'m drawing a 
bow here from being an only child with a stutter who 
explored after-hours council buildings to someone who 
developed an outsider mentality for success derived from 
anywhere the majority was not, through to where I am 
now, a father walking his son past an ex-services club and 
realising for the first time that he could become a member 
of that club if he just went in and asked. 

I watch my son dance in a puddle on the footpath 
outside, and I get a flashback to my daughter doing the 
same thing ten years ago when she was the same age, in 
this exact spot, walking this same ground, and how we 
walked out the back of the club to the car park to pick 
seedpods from the ground. At thirteen, I wonder what I 
have taught her about being an insider and being an 
outsider, about being in the realm of people or being 
nestled in solitude by brutalist architecture, or being 
amongst teeming thousands cheering and syncing up in 
immense collective harmony compared with walking 
down a storm-water drain with your dog. In a twist on the 
old Groucho Marx joke, have I taught her that she can be a 
member of club that would accept someone like her. As I 
take my son’s hand and walk inside the ex-services club, 
wiping our feet at the door so we don’t muddy the lush red 
carpet within, I think about my plans for the weekend and 


64 


how there might be somewhere out of town, not up the 
coast but down towards Sydney, that might provide a 
different landscape to calibrate some of these ideas. A 
bookstore in the Sydney CBD has a collection of books 
my daughter has been talking about lately. I think it’s time 
for a trip. 


65 


II 


The train journey from Newcastle to Sydney 
takes around two and a half hours, and we are lucky to 
have secured a Daysitter compartment on the regional 
train. With three seats it fits the two of us comfortably. 
My daughter sits against the window facing outside the 
train while I sit against the window facing the aisle 
where a rail guard walks back and forth. The restaurant 
car is open, and I buy my daughter a packet of chips and 
a bottle of water. Saying restaurant car feels 
anachronistic, or like I’m referencing an exotic travel 
feature from a rail journey far removed from here, and 
yet here it is, a restaurant car on a train between 
Newcastle and Sydney. 

I’ve only been aware of this regional rail for the 
past two years, and this is only the second time I’ve 
used it. The first time was when I was looking for a way 
to travel home from Sydney just after the pandemic first 
hit Australia. Worried about being on one of the regular, 
crowded trains where I would be breathing directly into 
the faces of fellow travellers, I found out about the 
regional rail by chance (a sign on the platform perhaps, 
booked seats only, and IJ likely went from there). That 
was two years ago, and since then I have not returned to 
Sydney. I avoided going anywhere, certainly not to 
populated areas anyway. All of my work travel ceased. 
Each weekday I would wake, walk through the yard to 
my home office - a freestanding building that we 
constructed to replace an old, decrepit garage - and sit 


69 


in a chair that, through dusty windows, drew in the 
morning sunlight. From there, I would work until 
afternoon, then walk back through the yard to the house. 
A hermetic existence, to be sure, but one that I relished. 

Tragic human toll aside, I could have readily 
maintained a pandemic lifestyle. Reducing people's 
movement throughout the neighbourhood made every 
weekday feel like Sunday. You could ride your bike 
down the middle of the road and not see a car for a good 
ten minutes. But that's me, approaching forty, finished 
with society. It was not necessarily the same experience 
for my daughter, eleven when the pandemic began and 
thirteen when routines from the before-times returned. 
That's part of what is fuelling this trip to Sydney, to get 
out of the house, out of the neighbourhood, to check out 
big bookstores and be amongst the populace again. She 
wants Sailor Moon manga, and for that, you have to 
head to the big smoke. 

Through Wondabyne and past the only railway 
station in Australia that is inaccessible by road, we look 
across Mullet Creek towards the mountain opposite, 
about which my daughter informs me that etched into a 
portion of its rocks are Egyptian-themed glyphs, 
assumed now to be the result of a practical joker from 
the 1920s imitating the cultural excitement about the 
boy king, Tutankhamun, at the time his tomb was found. 
My daughter has recently been up there on a walk of 
Darkinjung country, eager to connect with this part of 


70 


her cultural heritage and feel part of a more significant 
historic trajectory than can otherwise be found within 
the boundaries of our yard. She sits, eats her chips, and 
looks across the water before asking if we can play 
some music, softly, in our Daysitter compartment. 


The track she plays hears a synthetic voice, 
perhaps two different voices, sing a skittering melody 
over bubblegum pop beats. She says the style of music 
is called Vocaloid, named after a piece of software that 
imitates singing. You type in lyrics, choose the notes, 
adjust the parameters, hit play and then you have your 
soprano. She says there are different characters for the 
voices you can choose from, Japanese anime-styled men 
and women created to give a face to each voice, each 


71 


line of code. I remember seeing these now, watching a 
video from ten years ago of a virtual performance given 
on stage at a concert in Tokyo, a hologram of a digital 
girl projected onto a stage in front of thousands of 
young people waving neon rods in sync with the tunes. 
That’s the thing, my daughter says, these songs are old 
now, Vocaloid peaked ten years ago. Virtual concerts of 
hologram pop stars using their artificial vocal cords to 
sing impossible songs are so yesterday. But she has only 
just discovered them, the equivalent to me hearing 
Don’t Dream It’s Over by Crowded House in 1996 when 
I was thirteen, a decade after its release. She is 
nostalgic, at thirteen, for the most futuristic music 
imaginable, because its wave has already crested. 

It's fitting that I picked a 1980s song to reference 
just now because the tune my daughter is playing abruptly 
makes me feel nostalgic for my childhood during that 
period, or perhaps just a little bit later, the first years of the 
90s. Something about the interplay of the melody with 
these twinkling synthesisers, the way they sparkle in 
major chromatic runs like little fireworks released every 
four beats. It brings to my mind a series of overlapping 
musical memories. 

The first is the background music to a stage of the 
game Sonic the Hedgehog. Starlight Zone, the stage was 
called. I can see it now - black backdrop with blinking 
stars forged out of white pixels fading in and out of the 
sky, floating khaki platforms for the blue hedgehog to spin 


72 


across, and the music, four repetitious notes that first step 
up two tones and then bounce up an octave and trip back 
down a semi-tone, followed by a flurry of jazzy 
syncopated cocktail chords, nearly Bossanova infused (or 
am I just thinking that because now I'm thinking of space 
and I'm associating it with supernova). 

My second memory that connects here is the Starlight 
Room on the second floor of a local bistro and leagues 
club in our area. These days I see it as just another 
conference room, but when I was around six or seven I 
walked up around the turn of its red velvet staircase, 
possibly not even getting beyond the stairs because I was 
only allowed to walk up a little of the way by myself 
while my parents were talking with grandparents on the 
landing below, and I witnessed, hewn within the ceiling, a 
stunning galaxy of little pulsating lights that gave the 
Starlight Room its name. There was muzak playing that I 
cannot precisely recall other than to say I would not be 
surprised if it was the exact backing track for what we're 
listening to now. 

The third connecting musical memory is an 
advertisement for an album by the group Simply Red that, 
for a season of my childhood, seemed to air between every 
cartoon I watched. One particular song, Stars, I can 
remember being highlighted on the television advert, and 
while there seems little musical connection between that 
song and this Vocaloid tune, there is something about the 
melody that resonates here, and it feels as though the 


73 


muzak I cannot recall from the stairwell of the Starlight 
Room would naturally interpolate here as well. 

My final musical memory illuminated by this tune is 
another advertisement, or more accurately, a trailer for a 
film that must have been on a video cassette that I 
watched around this same period, for The Jetsons Movie, 
based on the 1960s cartoon about a family who lives in the 
future with flying cars and a robot housemaid. There is a 
moment in the trailer that I recall where a song is 
announced, the voice-over says something like 'Featuring 
a new original song by' some group, and then this electro- 
clash pop rock tune comes on while the daughter of the 
Jetson family, Judy, dances around a sparkly cave with a 
blue alien teenager wielding an electric guitar. I think 
there are also little fluffy alien animals, like hamsters and 
hedgehogs, who gaze out from the cave depths, watching 
the dance performance which elevates Judy and the blue 
teenager up through the area without regard for the 
conventions of gravity. 

All of these associations spontaneously come to me 
after the first verse of the Vocaloid song, inspired not by 
the lyrics, which I cannot decipher, but from the tone of 
the synthesisers that twinkle and sparkle; they have a 
sharp angle to them like a triangle wave, partnered with 
the jolting shape of the melodies they're forming. When I 
ask my daughter what this song is called, she says Gemini. 
The star constellation for the cosmic twins, which of 
course, makes perfect sense - an interstellar analogy. On 


74 


one side is this music we're listening to; on the other, there 
are musical memories that conceptually mirror the song's 
reflexive sensory associations, forged at this moment as a 
single glittering musical experience that, like all analogies, 
see two become one. 

After we listen to Gemini, my daughter plays the 
song again, but this time covered, sung by a human. They 
have a good voice, hit all the correct pitches and sing the 
fast bits with precision, but it sounds different and not in 
the obvious way you'd expect. Discourse on the digital 
production of art is often with deference to the superiority 
of the human spirit in the act of creation; even as 
artificially intelligent art algorithms win awards over their 
human competitors, there is the persistent background 
reminder that it was a human who wrote the code that 
made the robots draw and speak, so at heart, all art is still 
a human creation. And that's fine, but it isn't the most 
interesting part about listening to this human voice and 
comparing it with the software we just heard. 

It strikes me that, within this Gemini song, the 
angle of the melodies the human is singing makes the 
music sound more artificial than when the software was 
performing it. Listening to the way the notes jump half 
octaves up and down, trilling a quaver before running 
down a flurry of descending grace notes - when they fly 
out of the mouth of the robot they sound so natural, like a 
songbird on a branch greeting the morning star, and yet 
from the tongue of this human the same notes sound 


75 


robotic. I wonder what the term for this phenomenon is — 
we call it the 'uncanny valley' when a robot tries to act like 
a human but doesn't entirely sell the performance, but 
what about the opposite, when the robot sings notes that 
are written for it and sound more like a product of nature 
than when the human performs the same task. And that's 
the key, that the music was written for the robot, that's 
what creates the effect, which leads me to wonder what 
other parts of art and society and language and democracy 
and thought will be written for robots to perform in a state 
of natural grace in ways that humans will come up short 
against. When I say 'will be written’, I should be saying 
‘will continue to be written’. At work when I make a 
mistake, or someone else does, I say, ‘well, it's just a sign 
that the robots haven't taken over yet; there is still room 
for human error, and for that we should be happy’, but 
really if I took a good look at the shelf life of that 
sentiment, I would know it has already expired. 

We arrive within the depths of Town Hall Station, 
intricately layered within century-old corridors lit with 
gold glass lanterns the shape of pineapples, sliding scissor 
gates on elevators a hundred metres beneath ground level, 
beneath the Queen Victoria Building that contains its own 
knotty layers of spiral stairs that mostly lead to nowhere 
but sometimes lead to old clocks and bells, and at 
Christmas a view from all angles of an immense tree that 
ascends from above the station concourse through to a star 
suspended from the glass dome at the building’s apogee 


76 


four stories above. Christmas is mostly when we come 
here, a couple of days each year or two in the city over the 
Summer, a tradition we commenced when my daughter 
was five - perhaps a swim at the city pool, a walk through 


77 


The Rocks, and a visit here to the Queen Victoria 
Building, especially a little toy shop on the top floor that 
displays beautiful heritage dolls and carriages in its 
windows. My daughter would walk past these, though, 
and head straight for the fantastical beasts that occupied a 
medieval castle near the cash register, where she would sit 
and play and pick out a Cerberus or an armoured dragon to 
take on the train ride home. And, one year, we covertly 
took the castle home, too, ready to be opened on 
Christmas day. 

Out on the street, we spot a busker dressed in 
yellow pyjamas with a green leaf atop his head, the 
costume of a video game character my daughter enjoys, a 
half-flower half-animal creation called a Pikmin. He’s 
playing a rapid breakbeat on empty pasta sauce buckets, 
and he spins his drumsticks and shows his teeth in a 
massive smile whenever someone drops some coins on his 
mat and takes his photo. This is already a thrilling trip into 
the city - where else would you spot a happy Pikmin 
playing drums on the street. I point to glass windows two 
stories above his head, our bookstore destination. 

The store resides in what is called The Galeries, a 
further collection of winding corridors (a persistent theme 
of this trip, corridors that lead to more corridors, until 
you’re not sure if you’ve crossed beneath or above a street 
in the meantime, walking in one entrance and suddenly 
finding yourself on another side of the city) that used to 
house the Sydney Mechanics’ School of Arts, the oldest 


78 


continuous lending library in Australia. I used to see 
various Mechanics Institutes on trips across the state, often 
housed in beautiful sandstone buildings kept in a heritage 
state, such as the one a suburb over from our home, the 
Lambton Mechanics Institute, and wondered for years 
what they had to do with mechanics before I learned they 
were established as sites of adult learning, providing an 
opportunity for literacy and access to newspapers and 
journals, and lending libraries like the one established here 
in The Galeries. 

Within the bookstore we each go our separate ways 
for a time. My daughter heads to the manga section in 
search of Sailor Moon, and I head to the poetry and 
literature sections in search of anything that catches my 
eye from the catalogue of authors I’m carrying in my 
head. Recently I’ve been interested in the idea of The 
South, a conceptual community of authors that could 
theoretically run from South America through South 
Africa to Australia, the idea being that those countries 
share a global parallel, pretty much running along the 
Tropic of Capricorn, whereby a range of similarities across 
climate, culture, indigenous experience and other aspects 
have lead to, in some cases, complementary collective 
dreams. But then, what thread runs through Lispector, 
Coetzee and Murnane that could form a family language, 
and is it even noteworthy to consider, given the range of 
influences that run backwards and forwards through time, 
across all cultures, through these authors. Anyway, what I 


79 


actually end up finding is a beautiful hardcover from The 
North, a transcription of a Bernhard monologue he 
delivered for a film documentary called Three Days, 
which reminds me, from the opening paragraphs, of the 
fleeting biographical fragments that I enjoy so much from 
Beckett’s story Company. I find my daughter with her 
arms full of books which we take to the front counter and 
then out to the street. 

It's only early and we still have a couple more 
hours up our sleeve, so we decide to get some lunch and 
plan our next move, find another bookstore perhaps that 
might contain a few titles we couldn't find here. Neither of 
us feels like a big lunch, so we get a sausage roll and a 
bottle of water each from the window of an eatery just 
outside The Galeries. Looking for a place to sit and eat 
and read through our books, I remember the Hilton Hotel's 
foyer, just a couple of metres away. When the company 
Apple, for whom I used to consult for, had their offices 
across two floors of the Hilton building, I would meet with 
employees on the lounges in the foyer for a chat, or else I 
would prepare myself before I went to the elevators and 
headed up to the thirteenth floor. This is where I take my 
daughter, to one of the tables in the foyer, where every- 
thing is immaculate. Light cascades in from twenty-metre- 
high glass windows, and we unfold our books on the table 
and read and plot our next move. 

There is something about the potential for success 
that I found here in this building that I want my daughter 


80 


to pick up on, to get a sense that this is a pathway, that you 
can walk into a luxury building like this and, using your 
mind and good favour, add value to a space where 
someone will celebrate you through words and money. At 
thirteen, my daughter is a carbon copy of how I was at the 
same age - shy, uncertain, stubborn when she needs to be, 
and wondering how much of herself will join the world of 
people and how much will retreat. Lately, she has been 
talking about moving into the countryside to live in a 
cottage by herself, with a little plot of land for growing 
food, next to a forest perhaps, part of a gentle community 
where she can purchase wares from the market on a 
Sunday morning before wandering back home. But then 
she’ll pivot; perhaps she’d rather live in a city high-rise 
with a rooftop for midnight parties, with fairy-lights strung 
between the pool area and the cabana, overlooking a 
harbour, soft dub music padding the floor. Both options 
are testing her sense of her own future capacities, while 
still so young, and whether she’ll be able to afford to 
travel in a sleek elevator down to a supermarket with 
premium strawberries or whether she’ll be like our 
bricklayer whom I recalled towards the outset here, telling 
me how he survived for years on potatoes from his dusty 
little garden. None of that sentiment is meant to cast any 
aspersions on class or economy or labor, but these are the 
considerations that take us out of childhood as we face the 
mirror of a morning and look for what is within us that can 
handle what is coming. 


81 


I look up other bookstores, particularly manga- 
focused ones, and find what looks like a good option some 
thirty-minute walk from here, but with the number of 
rideshare services around we book a car coming towards 
us in little time. While we wait outside I see a plaque 
attached to the top of a broad black cylindrical marble 
pole. It comes up to my waist, something I’ve never seen 
in all the times I’ve walked by here. It reads, ‘To the 
memory of’, and lists the names of those who, I learn, 
were killed here at the site of Australia’s first domestic 
terrorist attack when a bomb in a rubbish bin exploded as 
it was emptied into a garbage truck. It killed two garbage 
collectors and one police officer, targeting, it is now 
assumed, a member of the Commonwealth Heads of 
Government Regional Meeting that was being held inside 
the Hilton. It is a subtle marker, like so many plaques and 
monuments positioned just outside pedestrian 
consciousness, that speak to grave, often enormous, 
historical moments that, for those not aware or affected, 
like my daughter and I here now, briefly conjure grand 
ghostly visions of events that barely seem possible to have 
occurred on this very spot. 

In the same way that I referenced human memory 
earlier as a layering of transparent plates of glass across 
one another, with one memory casting its colours against 
the memory beneath and above to create new memories - 
composite remembrances that become all that we know - I 
think similar about not just these sites of historical event 


82 


but any given patch of land. You think of how many 
people have walked up and down this spot or on the street 
outside your home, the toddlers who became school 
children who became parents who became grandparents 
walking down to the bowling club, dressed in their Sunday 
best, and you think of the all the democracy of objects and 
vehicles over time, the cars and bikes and perhaps 
bullocks and horse carriages too, and what it might look 
like to layer all of these on top of one another, to compress 
all history into a single present moment, all those phantom 
objects and lives projected onto the street, mingling 
together in a vast haze of multiplicity, of everything all at 
once. Sometimes photographers will take long exposure 
shots of a busy street where, because the camera shutter is 
given a long delay between closing and opening, the 
movement of the pedestrians and cars will blur together in 
such a time-stretched way that they physically dissipate, 
producing a visual illusion of an empty street. What I see 
in my mind, through a spontaneous revealing of all 
historical action on a single site, of seeing everything that 
has ever occurred there all at once, is an inversion of this 
long exposure, rather a double exposure, or more 
accurately, a  trillion-fold exposure of maximalist 
proportions, that instead of producing an image of an 
empty street would, perhaps, create an image so packed 
full of visual information that the street itself would be 
emptied out of physical form, like a coastal shelf eroded 
by waves, revealing a tunnel burrowed within cluttered 


83 


black space, where a pinhole of light, a gap of a mere 
pixel width, allows just enough space for a future to 
atrive. 

Brushing sausage roll crumbs from our faces 
before the car arrives, I point up at the side of the building 
across the street to where window cleaners are working 
together, synchronised, as they descend the sheer front of 
glass and stone. They look like musical notes on a stave, 
semibreves probably, with stone column bar lines dividing 
the notation. My daughter immediately looks away, it 
makes her too dizzy to look up at them, but I keep staring, 
fascinated with their alignment. They bring to mind a 
philosophical article I read some months ago on spacetime 


| 


84 


called Sideways Music. The idea is that most agreed-upon 
considerations of time are not reliant on the world being 
oriented in any particular way — you can be upside-down, 
the world can be flipped, inverted however you'd like, and 
time will still travel the same old way it always does. But 
the article's author says, what about music and how it 
travels through time, from one point to another, with all 
the notes lined up horizontally on a musical stave being 
played one after another. If you were to rotate that music 
ninety degrees, you would not get the same music, but 
instead, you would hear all the notes played at once. A 
ninety-minute symphony would take place in the length of 
a single note, with all other notes used across the scale of 
the composition pressed together into the duration of that 
single one, a brief chord containing everything. The 
argument, in part, is that because of this extreme distortion 
to the performance and the mangled aesthetics that would 
result, we should consider the impact of geometric space 
orientation on our conception of time flow. 

A moral question arises here, too, on the impact of 
reorienting, say, the development of ideas over time. 
Consider how our understanding of how children acquire 
language has evolved across the centuries, from early 
ideas about the impact of adults talking around a baby to 
the architecture of linguistic devices we can now give a 
name to. We presume that our understanding has gotten 
better over time, more accurate to the reality of human 
experience, but what would the moral basis for that 


85 


consideration be if the development of ideas were turned 
sideways so that, rather than this idea leading to the 
evolution of the next idea, and so on, that trajectory of 
understanding was compressed into a single moment, 
where the starting point, of misunderstanding, and the 
endpoint, of understanding more, and everything between, 
were the very same. And what would it do to parental 
gaze, looking at a child, at my son and my daughter, not as 
seeds coming into bloom hour by day, year by decade, but 
a lifetime in an instance. You see attempts at this on the 
internet, where people photograph themselves daily and 
turn them into a rapid video timelapse, where thirty years 
of life are observed in mere seconds. Nobody seems to 
have quite worked out yet how to meaningfully render 
eighty years of human life, let alone a multitude of human 
lives, into the duration of a hand clap, which, considering 
the cacophonous nihilism of a symphony turned vertical, 
is to our favour. 

Our car arrives and we put our masks on and get 
in. We are driven to Haymarket, where we are dropped 
off in front of a plain five-storey office building. It is a 
box of alternating strips of glass and concrete, all 
roughly the same dimensions, from the ground to its flat 
roof. This is another one of these anonymous modern 
spaces that I am forever drawn to, because for all their 
impersonal utility they cannot help but give off a smell, 
an intimacy of some gradual economic failure that, for 
all I know, may or may not be real, and it endears them 


86 


to me in a dozen tender ways. Like arcades in the throes 
of decline, car parks on the side of town that nobody 
travels to anymore, shopping centres waiting for the 
final business to move out so they can either be 
demolished or let sit there as an empty shell for land 
banking, these places resonate with a part of me that 
feels a responsibility to failure, a decorum of 
recognising the inevitability, the grace, of failing, and 
finding peace within. 

Inside this particular building with its 1980s 
peach paintwork, faux marble balustrades, chunky metal 
railings, escalators and mirror walls, is, so far as my 
daughter and I walk past, a hairdresser (closed), a 
passport photograph store (closed), a children’s tutoring 
service (closed), an optometrist (open), an education 
administration office (open), a noodle restaurant 
(closed), a dumpling restaurant (closed), a bakery 
(open), what looks like a technical college of some sort 
(closed), a travel agency (closed), and the bookstore 
(open) we came here for. 

The bookstore has a limit of allowing four 
people at a time inside, such are the small dimensions 
of the place and testament to how packed full of books 
it is. We only wait a couple of minutes before two 
teenagers leave and we are let through by a polite 
employee who points us to the wall of manga they think 
we'll be most interested in. They are correct, and while 
this place is a hundred times smaller than the bookshop 


87 


we went to in The Galeries, it contains everything my 
daughter has hoped to find. It reminds me of what the 
internet promised when we all started getting dial-up 
modems, the potential to find a place, a community, for 
your esoteric, quirky interests in a way that television 
and supermarkets could never provide. My daughter 
excitedly loads her arms full of books, and we become 
members of the store (for a discount on this sale and the 
opportunity for future offers, all for the price of an e- 
mail address added to a marketing distribution list). We 
are both full of buzz as we leave the store, thrilled to 
have found this gem of a store by taking a chance on a 
trip across town, and so we decide to not call another 
car just yet but rather walk around the area a little more, 
perhaps get a drink and have a sit down somewhere. 

We wander down a quiet access road between 
buildings that looks like it leads somewhat towards the 
harbour. To our amazement, we walk out onto a 
spontaneous cornucopia of colour and delight, a food 
hub structured around a broad courtyard with tiered 
bench seating all around, partially covered by wood slat 
gazebos which, on this occasion, have dozens of green, 
red, pink, yellow and pale blue flags hanging from 
them, all depicting different characters from the Hello 
Kitty universe. There are around a hundred people in the 
vicinity, mostly pairs and bigger groups of people 
talking and eating together. It is such a beautiful sunny 
day, and the feeling of walking out onto this scene of 


88 


festive, happy community is just wonderful, decorated 
with all this abundant joviality. A Hello Kitty modern 
art exhibition is on by the looks of things, annotated not 
only by the flags but also tall psychedelic prints of 
Japanese punk artworks that incorporate the Hello Kitty 
character, such as skateboard graffiti Hello Kitty, robot 
mecha Hello Kitty, a superflat flowerface Hello Kitty 
that looks like a Takashi Murakami original, and, in the 
centre of it all, a five-metre tall inflatable Hello Kitty 
face embedded in a cloudscape with a bouncy rainbow 
behind. 

I take a photo of my daughter posed in front of 
the giant inflatable, she’s keen to send it to her friends 
who share her enthusiasm for all things infused with 
Japanese pop culture, and I can see how magical she’s 
finding all of this - the little bookstore that contained 


89 


such abundance, walking out onto this maximalist 
carnival of wonder, all sunshine and populated and not 
done yet, because we can see they are selling Hello 
Kitty themed food down by one of the quieter eateries, 
little ice creams with edible character image candies on 
top. We sit with our dessert and look out onto, what 
else, a pop-up ice skating rink set up beside the harbour, 
a half dozen kids in colourful skates gliding around an 
artificial frozen lake with a sun-kissed ocean just behind 
them. What a scene. A long way from falling asleep 
with my dog on top of an abandoned gasworks solo. 
Looking around, I notice that I’ve been to this 
area once. A couple of years ago, when I was involved 
in a Start-up business project, I gave a talk at an investor 
event in a conference centre just down the boardwalk. I 
tell my daughter about it, and she remembers my 
involvement. After attending a  disability-focused 
technology hackathon on a whim (I think the invitation 
came to a colleague and I by accident), my team (we 
were the only team thrown together haphazardly 
because we didn’t pre-plan our involvement, a 
ramshackle collective that included a Russian artist, an 
Iranian hacker, a Vietnamese ethics philosopher, and my 
colleague and I, two rogue school teachers who’d been 
finding emerging opportunities outside of the 
classroom) somehow won the event, first prize of some 
twenty-five thousand dollars to invest in the creation of 
a wearable tech device. The idea for the device was that 


90 


it was, essentially, a mood ring with machine learning 
built-in; a wristband that could detect anxiety-related 
emotions through sensors (we also looked into socks 
and singlets because they pressed against parts of the 
skin where subtle electrical changes could triangulate 
interoceptive data) and then send that information to the 
phone of the user, or the phone of a trusted adult in the 
case of a child, to provide an early warning system for 
an anxiety-related behavioural response, to give enough 
time for the individual to be supported so they could get 
themselves out of a stressful situation and start self- 
regulating. It was a fascinating concept, but it didn’t 
make it beyond that point. 

The thing that I tell my daughter, though, the 
part about the whole experience that stays with me, is 
how much fun it was after the investor event in the 
conference centre that I’m pointing to behind the 
skating rink. I had to give a presentation about our 
device to a room full of people that night, and as of the 
afternoon, I was barely prepared. With only the vaguest 
idea of what I would talk about, I finished up my school 
day and boarded a nearby train en route to Haymarket 
via Central Station, sketching some talking points on a 
pad and reciting a few key lines in my head. By the time 
I arrived in Sydney and ran, just in time, into the event, 
I was a pulsating ball of nerves and energy, unsure 
about anything that would come out of my mouth. I 
found my team, we embraced, and when my name was 


91 


called to represent us on stage, I walked up and took the 
microphone from its stand and said everything I wanted 
to say with flourishes of humour, with genuine emotion, 
telling stories about children I worked with, wrapping it 
all up in relevant research, and walking down 
afterwards into the crowd knowing, all modesty aside, 
that I'd knocked it out of the ballpark. 

That trip down narcissism lane is not the part I 
tell my daughter. The part I tell my daughter focuses on 
after the speech, when my team and I met some 
investors and one of them recommended we change the 
name of our potential company. We agreed it would be a 
good idea, so after a few complimentary drinks, we 
bounced outside to the boardwalk by the harbour and 
walked to Central Station to catch our rides home, 
talking all the while about possible names for our 
venture. This is the part of the narrative I try to capture 
for my daughter, to tell her how exciting it was to glide 
across the city with this ragtag collective who I’d only 
known for a month but was already enamoured by, the 
way everybody was so clever and creative with their 
ideas, and this one scene, the moment that stands out 
above all else, where we all pushed onto a train 
together, standing room only, seeing our artist grab a 
little pad to record the jumble of words we were spilling 
out (emotions, feelings, a prompt for those things, a 
research term), the hacker and the philosopher go back 
and forth with iterations (if IQ is for cognitive 


92 


intelligence and EQ is for the emotional side, and if we 
are wanting a way of describing how emotional signs 
can be recorded, alerted, prompted, in some way), my 
colleague and I looking around at the sea of faces on the 
train and just smiling, what have we gotten ourselves 
into, and then it comes to us all at once, collectively — 
eCue, as in ‘e’ for emotion and ‘cue’ as a way of 
describing a prompt, and it sounds like EQ. Brilliant. 
We knew it was a bit cheesy and smacked of superficial 
corporate gloss, but we’d created it together, here on 
this train, pressed against a thousand other bodies, 
twenty minutes out from the conference centre, four 
hours out from when I left my school and jumped on a 
train. This was the adult equivalent of walking into a 
sunny food court graced with a five-metre-tall inflatable 
Hello Kitty face. 

Like in the foyer of the Hilton Hotel, this is the 
feeling of potential I want to convey to my daughter, to 
provide a model for what is possible out there in the 
world. You don’t necessarily need to be down here in 
the middle of the Sydney metropolis to know the 
feeling, but for the same reason that folks the world 
over disembark on capital cities for creative 
opportunities, it doesn’t hurt to recognise how a 
geographical condition predicated on millions of lives 
pushed together economically is going to result in, at 
the very least, a spectrum of bustling variance that you 
don’t find in small towns. And sometimes you just need 


93 


a holiday down here to get a sense of it again, to dip 
your toe in the sprawl and, then, retreat to your nest 
amongst the quieter aspects, the calmer days, to recall 
the energy and the heat that bustling communities 
provide. That’s certainly how I seem to live. It would be 
too much for me down here all the time, and I’ve never 
really believed in the idea of a middle ground between 
light and shadow — things are either on or off. To 
misquote Nietzsche, you either have chaos in your soul 
whilst you give birth to a dancing star, or you’re a soap 
bubble trailing the gentle slipstream of a butterfly. 
You’re either pressed against a thousand others on an 
evening train or walking with your son beside a string 
of empty coal train wagons, looking up at the midday 
sun. 


The pandemic is not what brought my period of 
Hilton Hotel foyers and hackathon ventures to a close. It 
may have been more closely aligned with the pending 


94 


birth of my son, but even before then I could feel my 
Icarus wings melting. There is something phantastical at 
play when you’re part of a network of busy, success- 
hungry others. A lot of smoke and mirrors give rise to 
possibilities, but you need to constantly monitor your 
ascension towards the sun and, if you’re unable to lower 
your altitude, at least ensure you’re over water. The 
moment this crystallised for me was on a work trip in 
Singapore while I was sitting at Raffles bar one afternoon. 
I had snuck away from the conference I was attending to 
wander the streets of Singapore, and by chance, I found 
myself in the foyer (another luxury hotel foyer, what is the 
symbolism here) of the historic Raffles Hotel. When I say 
by chance, I actually mean this. A walk down one narrow 
street led to an adjacent street with colourful window 
boxes on the side of weatherboard apartments. Without a 
noticeable transition, I was now walking on grass through 
a garden of abundant ferns that led to a sheltered corridor 
(good fortune, as it had just started raining), a foyer, and 
then up some stairs to an open rooftop bar with a bathtub, 
rapidly filling with rainwater, in the middle of the area, 
then down some more stairs into an outdoor bar area. The 
rain had stopped, so I dried a seat with my shirt and sat 
down. I took out a pad and started writing an 
impressionistic poem describing some of what I’d just 
seen and been thinking about, as well as a vision of 
perhaps what was changing or being realised within me. 
This is the first part of the poem: 


95 


So what the raindrops are halogen 

or magnesium in glowlight and The 
Fighter, of course, only one without 
an umbrella, and yet what matter 

the straw hat the white linen shirt 
drenched one minute now steaming 
not quite dry but surely near enough 
to snap the barbs Time’s Arrow’s head. 


Past The Cathay the cinematic air still 
filled with sundrop cylinders fizzling 
as they hit feetfallen avenue that The 
Fighter, bless him, past his prime, soft 
gutted shoulders hunched yes but broad 
enough to still do what sky imbues him 
with - an ever present warning signal 
posture ready to return the rocket flare. 


Past The Cathay on Fat Boy’s Burgers 
say burger red the colour of fascination 
of course, of course, could throw these 
wet clothes into the bin at shops, The 
Fighter buy a new shirt robot cat future 
proof of the sudden downpour for later 
regaling to who - one who peels brown 
autumn shells from flowers, puts in ears. 


96 


The rain on the tiles near the outdoor 

bar in Raffles make the tiles look wet, 
like really wet, like each tile were a 
brown expressionist painting of great 
wetness with acrylic emulsion polymers 
nowhere near dry and say who knows 
how The Fighter got here from the street, 
from bend of bay through horticultured 


archway, possibly, who can say, except 
perhaps the one he spots sitting there 

in the rain - my old friend, of all places, 
the synchronicity of it - The Failure. 
Absorbed in the televisual news, he is 
leaning on the wet bar with raindrops 
mingling in nestled sea of bourbon. Lad, 
it is not that I cannot process it all, say 


he turns to The Fighter, but rather it 

is not enough no am not after censor 
nor longform perspectivism or peace 
but something I can okay listen to this 
Howe & Nissenbaum two oh oh nine 
regarding obfuscation even just the 
word fills me with hold on my lips are 
dry like tiles that never knew the rain. 


97 


A mind that can absorb so much and yet 
use so little, The Fighter met The Failure 
in his neatly cubed backyard in Wee Waa, 
this is going back say a decade plus, say 
doubleback and sponsor the pastwise, say 
The Fighter as story being told by The 
Failure, every narrative a diary of youth 
being told to the ever-youth in our head. 


I went a'walking the other day and heard 
a new voice behind my eyes, perhaps 
the third evolution of tenor and gradient, 
of bend and volley, that my headwords 
have resounded since preverbal longing 
hold up The Failure smacks the bar thus 
teaching glisten to pike, to pirouette, oh 
you think so much and wander so little 


my fighter now punch your way towards 
train station, Adlestrop, no I mean the 
paddle pop at the mass rapid transit stand, 
we should blockchain to Shenzhen for 
biohack components, I foresee a subskin 
flat breadboard to prototype a filter that 
pollutes all incoming news of the world, 
yes lad, views o' the pearled nihilistening. 


98 


RPI PART SP SEANG 
eed ane ek ay 
. 


sh 


The idea of The Fighter and The Failure came to 
me as a way of talking about two conceptual parts of 
myself. I see them conversing, but in another way, they are 
the same person, analogies of each other, as always, as two 
become one. The Fighter is, by all accounts, an auto- 
biographical story of youth, a story that The Failure, an 
older man approaching the end of his days, tells himself 
whilst sitting in some quiet, imaginary backyard. This is 
who I am - a man, older than myself, who looks back at 
what he has worked on in his life to see only a crumble of 
dust and silence, and this provides modesty and a great 
sense of peace because it is a good thing to look back at 
one's accomplishments and see how time renders them 
indistinguishable from their opposite. It creates a sense of 
grace. And, I am also a young man who, though still with 


99 


time to come, is 'past his prime, soft gutted shoulders 
hunched yes but broad enough to still do what sky imbues 
him with'; in other words, he may have professionally 
peaked and is no longer in the form he was, but he is still a 
contender, he can still strap his hands and pack a punch 
when he needs to. I must have read a blurb on the back of 
a Samuel Beckett play, likely Endgame, describing the 
play, or perhaps Beckett's oeuvre in general, as like a 
heavyweight twitching on the mat. That seems a very 
good image to me, the boxer on the mat beneath the lights, 
reeling from a knockdown, but you know from his 
electric, horizontal jerks that he's got fight left in him. He's 
going to get back up and prepare for round two, or three, 
or whatever, and he'll probably be laughing all the while. I 
had our local, historic boxing legend, Les Darcy, in my 
mind, too, feeding into this image. From the beginning of 
the second part of the poem: 


It is possible he should have allowed 
the blood poisoning from his tooth 

to swallow him after the knock taken 
in the beachside ring back six months 
that afternoon when the sandscape 
melted in waves of grainy lava phasing 
see Les Darcy at Balmoral, see how 
Red and Gold Sunset by Whistler was 


100 


a mirror unto the slides of diagnostic 
hemoglobin observed in the seaside 
maternity hospital, see the young cad 
in Woolworths sizing up The Fighter 
and being egged on by mates and and 
wham he receives The Fighter in his 
toffee toned raincoat with enough full 
physical force to turn the contenders 


muscle tendons into yeast, crushed ye 
entropically into the bakery shelves, 
thy mass now the bread of the universe 
that The Failure would later say must 
be broken off and shared unto itself like 
trees too far gone with sending signals 
of biological risk to one another so now 
all dialogue is via transplanted limbs. 


My daughter sleeps on the train journey home. 
When we atrive at Broadmeadow station, the rays from 
the sunset salting through the windows wake her up. We 
collect our books together and alight. Standing on the 
platform and looking back at the train, shadowed against 
the skyline, it appears like a thin metal pencil box, with 
windows of old brown glass, sourced perhaps from a 
medicinal bottle dug up beneath stubborn roots in the 


101 


garden. Going on this trip to Sydney, experiencing 
populated spaces again for the first time in recent years 
and thinking about the enterprising days of my former 
work life, I’m inspired to get involved with people again. 
On the walk home we pick up dinner on the way and walk 
past a community garden where I used to take my 
daughter when she was younger, and where I presently 
take my son. It’s been through various states of care and 
abandonment across the decade, but recently I noticed it’s 
been taken over by a new group of eager contributors. A 
chalk-penned sign on the garden advertises a community 
breakfast for tomorrow morning, six thirty, for anybody 
who’d like to learn more about the space and get involved. 
This sounds like just what I’m after. When I ask my 
daughter if she’d like to come too, she says she’ll think 
about it. 

I turn back to watch our train go into a tunnel. The 
sound it makes as it passes through, an alto stretch of wind 
pulled through stone piping, is like a low trumpet volley 
announcing the arrival of something, perhaps something 
coming up from underground. As the train leaves the 
tunnel, it playfully spills its carriages out into a tumble of 
daisy-pressed fields, rolling on its back and panting in the 
cool. 


102 


Il 


105 


The community garden sits between a Croatian sports 
club, a children’s playground and a sports oval. It’s a 
terrific spot — the garden itself contains a half dozen silkie 
chickens, a spectrum of herbs, fruits and vegetables 
(borage, gooseberry, Mexican tarragon, banana, guava 
passionfruit, mango, Vietnamese mint, pennyroyal, garlic 
chive, camomile, lettuce, potato, zucchini), car tyres 
planted vertically in the ground at different heights for 
children to balance on, little bridges over rock creeks, a 
wooden cubbyhouse, assorted water tanks, benches 
beneath foliage — and it benefits from its position next to 
the sports club, which provides an outdoor barbeque and 
pizza oven in shared yard space. We’ve been coming here 
for at least the past ten years; I remember bringing my 
daughter when she was just starting to walk, more fun than 
the playground next door, she’d walk out onto the bocce 
court that bumps up against the pizza oven and roll balls 
across the ground. Now my son goes into the same spot, 
although he prefers to climb the fences and flip the 
scorecards over. 

It's a good spot for walking my dog around here, 
not too close to the silkie chickens, of course, but just 
behind the garden on the sports oval. A gravel track runs 
the perimeter of the oval, shaded on one side by a row of 
Moreton Bay figs, and nestled on the other by a historic 
grandstand, a beautiful structure of some thirty rows of 
seating that, together, we climb to look out across the area. 
You can see the marina and fisherman's co-operative from 


107 


up here, as well as the beginning of Industrial Drive that 
heads out of Newcastle and up into the rural northern 
regions and east out to Stockton and Port Stephens, where 
the coal loaders and airport reside. A plane is overhead 
currently, heading for a six o'clock touchdown. I picture 
the airport, only a little terminal, with its little lights being 
switched on, toy trolleys waiting to collect the colourful 
pill-shaped bags that fall out the side of the plane, people 
shuffling about, legs and arms manipulated to provide the 
impression of movement. Why is this what I picture, a 
Lego version of the airport - I guess I'm used to seeing it 
from above. I'm reminded of a little poem I wrote on a 
return flight into Newcastle that felt like I was coming in 
late at night but was actually early morning: 


There is eighty to ninety percent flat 
black expanse between the pin prick 
glisten of the white and gold dot city 
behind the beach with an ember rim, 
why does it shine so, no necklace of 
lights or fire stake phosphorescence 
along the coastline, only lapping void 
and then I get it, the wing of the plane, 
its edge has caught some light of day 
inverted, a morning turning in reverse, 
not sand but aero alloy - waving hello. 


108 


Heading out of Newcastle on a northbound flight 
you can see, within the sand dunes that necklace the coast 
here, an area referred to as Tin City, a collection of eleven 
shacks half buried in the sand, made of corrugated iron, 
tea tree and solar panels, started by a handful of locals 
who needed a roof above their heads during the 
Depression, and still occupied and lived in today, but not 
owned, they are not allowed to be owned or sold in the 
traditional sense, only passed on to family or friends by 
direction of hazy local by-laws. I met a couple who lived 
in one of the Tin City shacks. They were sleeping rough 
beside the Croatian sports club here, outside beneath the 
covered patio. They cuddled my dog like he was a big 
teddy bear, which he sort of is, and told me that the Winter 
winds had all but covered their place in sand - they could 
no longer even get in through a window, so they were 
resting here for a couple of nights before jumping on a 
train to head inland where they had another shack, a 
mirror copy of the one in Tin City, located in a mining 
village amongst the red sands out west. Their annual 
routine was to live in their mining desert shack during the 
Winter when their home in Tin City was inhabitable, then 
leave the desert and head back to the beach when Spring 
and Summer came. They’d spend a couple days with 
neighbours digging their place out of the sand, and then 
they’d live out the warm months here, swimming of a 
morning, fishing for lunch and dinner, and sleeping on the 
beach when it got too hot inside. I asked which shack 


109 


came first, which was the original that they then copied 
and reproduced in the other sandscape, but they couldn’t 
remember. 

By a quarter past six, most of the community 
garden organisers have arrived and begun setting up the 
barbeque for breakfast. I introduce myself and offer to 
help, but they say they have it covered, which is not bad as 
I’m not great with cooking. To be honest, I’m not great 
with gardening either, which only occurs to me as I look 
around at the tools and the garden beds and wonder 
whether Ill be more of a hindrance than a helper. I look 
around the lock-up shed, which has a broken lock and 
latch, poke around the assorted gardening resources, and 
find a box full of wooden chess pieces and a foosball table 
pushed up against the back wall. Outside, behind the shed, 
is a planter box growing shoots of bamboo, a worm farm 
adorned with a large cutout wooden worm wearing a hat, 
and behind that is a hill of overgrown shrubs and ferns. I’d 
be happy to get in there and tidy things up; it doesn’t look 
like it will require any subtle gardening knowledge. The 
fence that sections off this part of the garden is falling 
down, and an old paper printed and laminated sign that 
once read Please Keep Off The Gardens must have used 
red ink for the words Keep Off; which have since faded 
away in the sunlight, leaving what should possibly be a 
gentle motto of the community project here. 

I’m passed a bacon and egg roll and start to mingle 
with the dozen others here. Most are a good twenty years 


110 


PLEASE 
ae he Oa 
2 THE. 
SARDENS| 
 : 


older than me, and for the most part they all seem to know 
each other already. Some have been involved in other 
community garden projects across the city, one near the 
cathedral on the hill, another over the bridge near the port. 
Community gardens have been springing up everywhere 
during the past decade. I always enjoy visiting them with 
my kids, but I don’t use them in the functional way they’re 
intended by picking herbs and vegetables and using them 
in meals. My daughter will always pick a strawberry when 
she sees one, but I’ve never been knowledgeable enough 
about using food grown from the earth in meals because I 
know very little about cooking. I know how to make a 
toasted sandwich, and I know how to grill a steak, but 
that’s about it. Perhaps that’s something I'll pick up from 


111 


here - I see on the noticeboard they host cooking events. 
Learn to garden, learn to cook; but I wonder what I'll 
bring to this space. 

The organisers ask if anybody has any questions 
about the garden. I want to ask something I noticed on the 
walk here — it rained heavily during the night, everywhere 
was pummelled after hours of water bucketed down across 
the neighbourhood, and yet when I looked closely at a 
flowerbed of little pansies they were all so spritely, their 
faces poked unperturbed skyward on their thin little green 
necks. They weren’t bent, they weren’t squashed face 
down in the mud by the force of the rain. How is that 
possible, that’s what I want to ask, and I want an answer 
that talks about the composition of the funnelling of the 
stem, how they only break if you double them over and 
then squeeze and twist. I want to know about the rubbery 
layers within the green tubing of their necks, but I don’t 
ask because I feel like the question might be 
misinterpreted as one about human resilience. Plus, it’s a 
silly question — they want to know if anybody has any 
questions about the scope of work here, the funding model 
for the community garden, who decides what is planted, 
and the maintenance schedule. I look around and see if 
anybody else has any questions, which they do, about the 
scope of work here, about the funding model, and so on. 

Conversations break into smaller groups now. 
Those next to me talk about the garden they’ve 
contributed to up on The Hill, near the cathedral. Someone 


112 


takes up the thread on the cathedral, about when they were 
a schoolboy and walked to the cathedral with their class 
on an excursion. They wandered the cemetery in the 
gardens out the back of the building, overlooking the 
harbour and the city. A curious focus for a school 
excursion, they assume it was for a history lesson but 
can’t quite recall. They went on how they were looking at 
the gravestones and noticed a half dozen who all died on 
the same day. Asking their teacher, assuming the cause 
must have been war-related, the teacher surprised them by 
saying they had died in a shipwreck off shore, that there 
used to be many shipwrecks when travel by water was the 
only way to travel to and from Australia. The teacher 
estimated that there had been around two hundred wrecks 
of boats trying to navigate the corridor into Newcastle 
harbour, and he pointed towards Stockton, where the iron 
hulls of some of the ships still remain lodged in the 
shallow seabed. 

I mention that I used to play the pipe organ at the 
cathedral when I was a teenager. During high school, I 
was a Student at the music conservatorium, next to Civic 
Park, near the fountain and the sculpture of decimated 
stone that my son and I visit. A window in the organ room 
on the third floor of the conservatorium looks out onto the 
park. I used to sit and watch little birds dance in the sunlit 
trees when taking a break from playing scales. This talk of 
music piques interest as one of the organisers leans over 
and talks about their love of the music of Bach, followed 


113 


by a chorus of agreement from others. It seems that 
everybody here loves Bach. I agree and say how much I 
enjoy looking at the sheet music of Bach's works to follow 
the geometry of his counterpoint, and how Bach used to 
compose music for the shape of the church he was writing 
for. This draws intrigue, what do you mean, and I explain 
what I read somewhere about the structure of some of 
Bach's later compositions, how he would align the 
structure of the piece to the architectural structure of the 
church. 

Consider walking down a church aisle from the 
front door to the altar. You might have a little foyer area at 
the beginning, followed by a widening out beyond this, 
and then perhaps there is a vestry off to the side before the 
aisle continues down, and then you get to the crossing area 
before the altar, where the building spans out left and right 
into the north and south transept. This is how Bach would 
structure his composition — the foyer would introduce a 
minor melodic theme, and then the widening out would 
introduce broad harmonic chords to expand the range of 
notes. When the vestry area comes along, there would be 
an opportunity for a new melodic flourish, a variation 
before returning to the theme, straight on now up the aisle 
before two bass counterpoint sequences would enter, the 
north and south transept, transposing the key in two 
different directions before resolving in the altar area. 

The counterpoint is the most fascinating part of 
this, I go on. There are times when you can hear Bach 


114 


pushing into atonality, very unusual for his period, 
experimenting with noise music, opening up the reeds on 
the organ to create a wall of sound at one end of the 
spectrum, and then a sonic inversion of that wall at the 
other, a slight melody that we nearly mistake for silence, 
only that it carves its initials into the atonal noise wall 
constructed opposite and hollows out a little of the density 
to reveal a gap - that’s the critical part, a momentary pause 
between melody and noise. That was Bach’s great 
innovation, the most significant musical innovation, to my 
mind, since rhythm was invented to mimic the beating of 
our mother’s heart, and melody conjured to imitate the 
sound of our mother calling our name. Sure, Beethoven 
later added a choir to an orchestra, but does this push 


115 


against the stratosphere in the way Bach accomplished a 
century earlier. The illusory pause on the knife edge of 
counterpoint, the promise of the resolution of the gap - it’s 
essentially the sonic representation of the birth of 
meaning, of human subjectivity, teetering between signal 
and noise, silence and nihilism. That’s what Bach 
constructed when he made music in the shape of churches. 

Now I’ve done it. I’m talking too much and being 
asked to say more. Because I know nothing about 
gardening or using herbs in cooking recipes, I’ve 
commandeered the conversation into my own ground, a 
tumble of disjecta that roll around my head as I walk 
around town but are never meant to be said aloud. 
Someone asks what I mean about human subjectivity, and 
it’s too late to retreat into polite conversation. I take a 
piece of chalk from a bucket and start annotating on a 
wooden fence next to the worm farm. 

Well, I say, I think that subjectivity, what we might 
call consciousness, comes into being when matter 
communicates with itself about itself, in a reflexive 
manner. Like hands drawing themselves, like the signals 
that trees send to other trees to communicate biological 
risk, but consider a tree not talking to other trees but rather 
talking to itself about itself, sending messages to itself, 
about itself, in an analogous manner, against a mirror. 

The use of the term analogous here is not casual. 
This is the very same birth process that the formation of 
analogy experiences. Consciousness, subjectivity, is an 


116 


analogy of itself - it comes to life as an analogy by how 
it relates to, and about, itself. Our subjectivity is a split 
between two states: the ‘J think’, and the ‘thing that 
thinks’; or, you might describe it in other ways - the flat 
language you give to your thoughts, and the symbolic 
thought tools that are fuelled by shadowed, unknowable 
intentions that help approach comprehension. This split 
is the subject itself, is our subjectivity. Within the split 
there is, as long as we live, an always manifesting, 
antagonistic potential that inhabits a position of 
incompleteness. This incompleteness is not 
epistemological, of not knowing enough about one own 
limitation of possible perceptions, but is an ontological 
incompleteness, rising out of a negative space, out of 
this split, that we might consider as less than nothing. 
So, let’s call this negative state of potentiality 
minus one (-1), this state of less than nothing in which our 
subjectivity resides, positioned not only at, but as the 
intersection, between zero (0), what we might call the 
democracy of objects around us, and plus one (1), the 
projected state of our idealised conceptions of these 
objects, that which we see around us in a positive state of 
being. Our subjectivity here should again be reemphasised 
not as something or nothing but as less than nothing, as a 
sublimation, a gap, a split that is always ontologically 
incomplete and in analogous dialogue with itself, in much 
the same way that matter talked to itself, about itself, to 
establish subjective consciousness in the beginning. Think 


117 


of a mObius strip, and it's halfway there. 

It might be tempting to see this as another dualism, 
or even as another structural trilogy, like the ‘father, son 
and holy ghost’, or the three blind mice, or the third eye, 
or whatever - but rather, it is more accurate to see it as two 
that is also one, as a dialectic that is not seeking a 
resolution of, say, two becomes one, but rather as an 
antagonism that supports this structure through conflict, 
through dialogue, in a manner that can only exist within 
the antagonism between two dualities. Think of midday, 
the moment when one becomes two: it is a gap that is 
made manifest because of the two periods of time on 
either side through which it intersects. Well - that gap is 
you. 

You catch yourself, during times like these, when 
you realise you’ve been talking too much, in a twin state 
of shame that faces out and faces in. Shame because you 


0 Oa eee ’ 
a * ae th Rn! eh f 


118 


realise you’ve let your mouth run away with itself, 
spouting ideas that should be relegated to the pages of 
obscure written tracts of autofiction. The surrounding 
faces are either too polite or perhaps too worried for you 
to turn away. But shame too because why should you feel 
poorly towards yourself for talking about what you’re 
passionate about, when you give your time to listen to so 
much disastrously dull conversation, and really you 
haven’t spoken like this to anybody for literal years, so 
give yourself a break. And maybe that’s what this is, years 
of cloistered living, out of the city, wandering with your 
pre-verbal and then just-verbal son, seeking out the quiet 
quarters with triangles of sunlight cast against brutalist 
government buildings, storm water drains, vacant soccer 
fields. My social capacities have diminished. 

A man in his sixties with a kind face and steel- 
wool hair leans towards me and asks what I do for a 
living. I tell him I used to be a classroom schoolteacher, 
but now I’m not sure, and he laughs and says that I talk 
like a teacher. Perhaps, he says, you’d like to give some 
lectures here some evenings. He says, we sometimes cook 
a pizza of an evening and invite speakers in, do you think 
you’d be interested in doing that. I say it’s a lovely offer, 
but I honestly don’t have much to say. What about music, 
he says, do you think you could give a performance here 
some evenings, or a nice morning breakfast Bach session, 
we could get an electric organ in. Or, do you write music 
perhaps. 


119 


I like that this chap has already clocked onto the 
fact that I will not be of any practical assistance here. He 
gestures to a new section of the garden, the main reason 
we’re all gathered here. They’ve received a substantial 
injection of resources to create a dozen new garden beds - 
wooden sleepers, bags of fertiliser, twine, seeds, and a 
donation of tools from the local Men’s Shed, beautiful 
vintage ones, dark wood-handled hoes and hammers. He 
says, would you consider writing a piece of music perhaps 
to commemorate the opening of the new wing of our 
garden here, we’re planning on having a little ceremony 
here in around six weeks, and we’ll be inviting all the 
volunteers who contribute to the garden, some of the local 
council members who organised funding, the school 
across the road are going to contribute artworks, and it 
would be wonderful if you would perhaps write and 
perform a piece for the event. 

Yes, I say, I'd love to do this, and it’s true, I really 
would enjoy writing something for the garden ceremony. 
Tinkering with music composition has been one of my 
amateur joys for many years. An idea for a piece 
immediately begins to form — what about an electro- 
acoustic composition that combines recorded sounds from 
the area here, a mapping of audio samples such as garden 
bird song, the rustling of leaves, the crumble of rock 
underfoot, even the gracing of salt from the boat sails on 
the harbour, jaunt air phasing from the coal carriages on 
the nearby rail, recording their shafts of choral resonance. 


120 


Then, layer these into an ambient soundscape that will 
provide a bed of tones for an organ piece to sit atop. I 
know someone nearby who runs a vinyl press; he can put 
these sounds onto a record which I can then spin on a 
portal turntable placed beside a portable organ, a 
harmonium perhaps, a little wind-powered keyboard that 
fits in a suitcase, for the performance. This excites me, 
and while I feel disappointed I haven’t put myself in for a 
more practical task at the garden, perhaps this is still a 
way to contribute to the community here, rather than 
requiring others to tutor me in methods of tending plants, I 
can independently get on with this task and bring 
something back that might add value to the overall project. 

I return home, collect my laptop, microphone and 
a stand, and then head back to the garden area to collect 
sound samples. Years ago, I used to contribute recorded 
sounds to an online database; it currently holds around 
half a million field recordings from across the world (or, 
played one after another, nearly a full year of continuous 
audio). While so much of internet media is image-based, 
and increasingly so (to the point where videos are watched 
with the sound turned off more than on, according to 
social media statistics), I find this community of sound 
archivists engrossing. You search for ‘seaside’ and get hits 
for five minutes of ambience on an island beach near 
Florida, of mallards on the coast of Chile, of big waves 
hitting Sweden from the Baltic Sea, a late summer 
afternoon on a private beach near a vineyard in Vietnam. A 


121 


search for ‘train station’ yields an electric train entering 
and leaving a quiet station in rural Japan, a passenger 
terminal in the Netherlands with hooligans chanting in the 
background, station announcements in Waterloo, a run of 
cargo wagons passing by a small town in the Wirikuta 
Desert. ‘Abandoned’ gets you fifteen minutes in a mine 
once used for the production of mercury, with notes that 
the main feature of the recording is that you can hear 
creaking as the sun hits the walls of the buildings and they 
begin to warm and expand. How can you go back to 
looking at photos and videos after being exposed to that. 

At the back of the sports oval is a rail line that, 
down the track, connects to the rail beside the TAFE. It 
might not appear to contribute anything positive to the 
community garden experience, but I enjoy standing near a 
patch of pennyroyal and looking through the wire fence 
across the oval towards the line and listening to engine 
rattle reverberate against the walls of the tunnel, the 
station, and carry back over here in dissolving tones. 
Those are the contributing sensory revelations that feed 
into the psychogeography of any area you find yourself in 
- part of the background wash of sound interpolated with 
highway drift and latent cuckoo call - and it does well to 
sometimes isolate them and consider their solo merits, 
distinguished from the broader symphony of splinters 
more often bypassed. 

I trek through long grass behind the oval towards 
the rail. There is a good spot with access right next to the 


122 


line just beyond a clearing at the back of a disused 
industrial grease manufacturer. Over a hill that divides the 
stretch I'm walking is a peculiar structure, a geodesic 
dome, set up in the clearing. From the community garden 
you can't see it, and I've been here in recent weeks and 
haven't seen it, so it must be new. What it is and why it is 
here is a complete mystery to me. I remember there used 
to be a large house somewhere here, there it is, mostly 
collapsed, with only a few rusted structural remnants 
present. A mate of mine used to call it Happyland. He 
described it as a deserted house where a rotating roster of 
local musicians would move in and squat for a period and 
perform in the yard, like an artist-in-residence venue for 
homeless jam bands. When I get to the dome, I see a 
couple of plastic chairs and a school desk within the 
structure's frame. Only a third of the dome is covered in 
sheeting; the rest is a series of exposed metal rods forming 
a tessellation of triangles that bend into the sky. I walk 
through to the other side, beside the remains of 
Happyland, and set up my laptop and microphone. 

An eight-car passenger train passes into Newcastle. 
I capture its curved sound wave, shaped like a rocket laid 
sideways, pointing to the east: a gradual ascension of 
audio fusing city ambience with the first rattle of rail, an 
arc of rising amplitude until the train is beside the 
microphone, deploying a thick block of sound that peaks 
sharply at the end, a final percussive hit of metal and wind 
as the train leaves the scene, fading the wave back to its 


123 


baseline. With my audio software, I take the recording and 
stretch its time to double the length. It just sounds like a 
slow train at half speed, comically so, an effect that might 
be used in a Hanna-Barbera cartoon. Halve the speed 
again, and you get something more interesting, the sound 
of wind passing through a half dozen brass instruments 
left outside overnight on wet grass. But things get even 
more special when you halve the speed again, a fifteen- 
second recording now extended to a two-minute duration, 
as the fibres of sound pull away from each other and 
reveal a choir of voices sitting firmly in the bass register. 
The closest environmental tone that comes to mind is a 
whale call, or perhaps more precisely, the sound of a bag 
full of alarm clocks dragged to the bottom of an empty 
public pool just as they begin to ring, a ghostly resonance 
that reverberates from the bottom up. The question is, 


124 


what are the choir of voices emanating from this time- 
stretched train recording trying to say. 

I try to halve the speed of the recording again, and 
the software hangs. The computer kicks its fan into high 
gear and sounds like it is chipping against something 
inside the case. Finally, the software crashes. When I open 
it up again, the sound recording is nowhere to be seen. It 
has been lost. The fan, though, hasn’t stopped. If anything, 
it’s getting noisier. I notice the laptop is rocking back and 
forth where I placed it on a flat pile of bricks near the 
fence. When I pick the computer up, I see the battery 
compartment is bulging, and its plastic base is red hot, 
causing me to nearly drop it. The battery must be 
expanding and pushing the casing out from within. I 
remember now that when I put the laptop in its bag this 
morning it seemed like a tight squeeze, and now this. Not 
good. I power the computer down and leave it on the 
bricks for a moment. What a hassle - it’s the only 
computer I’ve got, and besides this current project I need 
it for work. My best friend through high school and 
university, someone I don’t see nearly enough these days 
(once every two years, less, even though he only lives an 
hour away), is a whiz at fixing computers. He doesn’t park 
his car in his garage anymore because it’s wall to wall, 
ceiling to floor, full of hard drives, video cards, batteries, 
you name it. For all I know, he’s running a massive 
cryptocurrency mining operation in there. I call him, and 
he says he’Il meet me in an hour. 


125 


By the time the laptop has cooled enough to put it 
back in my bag, and I’ve packed up and walked across the 
clearing to a hole in the fence near the old grease 
manufacturing plant (with flying elephants, Dumbo 
inspired, painting on the back of its factory walls), my 
friend has arrived. He hops out of his car and we embrace. 
How long has it been this time, since before my son was 
born at any length, at least two, maybe three years. The 
thing about my friend and I is we taught each other three 
very important things during our formative high school 
and early university years — we taught each other how to 
laugh, how to think, and how, if I can reference Thoreau 
here, to not keep pace with our companions, but to instead 
keep step with our own music; which, when you’ve got a 
license to drive and your teenage peer group is throwing a 
party every other weekend fuelled by drugs and alcohol 
and massive dollops of banality, you’re grateful to have 
someone in the passenger seat as you drive in the opposite 
direction of these parties, towards a strip of palm trees that 
run parallel to the runway of the regional airport that saw 
its last flight take off on the late seventies, down to the 
quiet beach, the sparkle of chemical waste factory 
glittering steam into salt just beyond the dunes (the sister 
to this grease manufacturing plant brother we’ve met 
beside this afternoon), where you trade Simpsons quotes 
and compare Robert Heinlein to Hermann Hesse and walk 
up and down the airport runway. And then it’s the classic 
trajectory, life happens, you get jobs, those thousands of 


126 


hours of free time you used to have in abundance become 
fleeting seconds scraped out from between the cracks of a 
laundry list of infinite responsibilities, and you don’t see 
each other for years on end. 

Before looking at the computer, we park in town 
and walk around our old haunts. It’s a Sunday, and barely 
anybody is around. We start near the violin repair store, 
beside which a popular pub, now debris, used to stand. 
Once, on a day that still reverberates within me, I called in 
sick to work and went on a slow walk across Newcastle. 
More than any other occasion, that day stays with me as 
the crucible for my love affair with the city. It was a time 
of heightened work-related stress and exhaustion, and I 
just turned off my phone and began roaming across town, 
from the public library through to walkways that lead to 
lush shaded courtyards out the back of apartment 
buildings I’d never seen before, onto a labyrinth of streets 
that rise and fall between harbourside industry and 
lighthouse shine, by the beachscape shadowed by military 
fortifications, orchard courtyards out the back of hospitals 
being converted into robotics warehouses, and then to 
here, this collapsed pub beside the violin workshop. When 
I pushed through the thin protective plywood barrier 
surrounding it, I was stunned at the long-lost civilisation 
found within. The pub was last active before I was born 
(probably closing its doors the same day, the same minute, 
the airport I just mentioned saw its final departure up the 
runway), so when I walked over its crumbled brick facade 


127 


and up the exposed concrete stairwell and saw trees 
growing through its middle (coming up from the 
dancefloor, from what I could make out of the remaining 
bar and seating area), I knew I’d struck psychogeographic 
gold. 

My friend takes two rubber balls from his back 
pocket and passes one to me. They’re patterned like 
miniature soccer balls. He walks, and I follow him, down 
the side of the violin store where an abandoned lot stands 
behind the old pub, facing a five-metre-tall concrete wall 
before a thirty-storey apartment complex. Rolling the ball 
around in his hand, he reaches back and launches it at the 
side of the concrete wall, catching it on its rebound. He 
does this again and tells me he’s been doing this down 


128 


where he lives, on the Central Coast. It might be a way to 
make walking more enjoyable, taking a ball and throwing 
it against the sides of buildings, or it could be a reflex 
exercise, training hand-eye coordination; or, it could be 
just one of the many lightly subversive acts of social 
rebellion my friend has enacted over the years, and which 
I have subsequently learned to enact as well. Have a go, he 
says, and I throw my ball at the same wall and fumble the 
catch as it ricochets back. I try a couple more times and 
begin catching it consistently. 

Let’s try the apartment building now, he says. He 
walks a dozen steps forward and then runs as he winds up 
and throws the ball hard at the apartment building. It flies 
over the wall and strikes what looks like the glass elevator 
column of the apartments, probably ten floors up, before 
bouncing off and landing on the far side of the car park. 
As he goes to recover his ball, I throw mine, aiming for a 
similar spot but it strikes further left, the balcony of one of 
the apartments, and the ball arcs off and bounces on top of 
the concrete wall before landing in the dirt near my friend. 
He collects it and throws it back to me, and we continue 
down the street. 

The last time we met was down his way, at a 
Spanish restaurant by the water. He had just built a custom 
virtual reality headset that he brought to show me. It was 
an elaborate headpiece comprised of six stained glass 
windows, its structure partway between a cathedral and an 
observatory. Each eye had three panes to look through (a 


129 


glass, darkly) from north to south which produced, in my 
friend’s description, an algorithmic sequence of vowel- 
shaped filtered lights that facilitated not virtual reality but 
augmented reality, an overlay of digital composition on 
what we can otherwise see in the world around us. His big 
idea, untested, was that it would be wearable in the rain, 
so you could sit outside in a drizzle and see digital 
projections blending, bleeding, with the wet city around 
you. 

What sort of projections — well, say you’re walking 
through a park (while it’s raining), and then you look into 
the distance and see enormous ancient statues on 
mountains, and then further into the sky, you see the 
planet Saturn so close you can count the individual ice 
particles of its rings. Walking up to a tree, you take a leaf 
in your hand and it becomes transparent, showing you a 
network of fibres that transition into circuity, betraying the 
natural world as just an illusory computer simulation. My 
friend was adamant, beyond sway, that the rain, however, 
must be real, must be outside the glass, actually falling on 
and dripping down the headpiece, and not just a digital 
effect. 

My friend asks whether it is just a bit of cognitive 
dissonance, a bias on our part, that we feel The Simpsons 
was such a great television comedy. And that, perhaps if 
we were born ten, fifteen years later, or earlier, we would 
choose some other show. But we both know that’s not 
true. I tell him that I watched a scene recently when I was 


130 


looking for where they reference, quote, the ‘cynical 
members of Generation X’, during a bit hosted by the 
perennial B-grade movie actor Troy McClure, using his 
trademark gag of ‘You might remember me from such 
movies as’ and then he launches into a series of bizarre 
punchline titles. McClure references two films during this 
bit, the first of which is The Boatjacking of Supership 79. 
My friend and I laugh at this, a hilarious title, so stupid yet 
so on-brand for the sort of movie it represents. 

What I didn’t know, I tell my friend, was that this, 
and other movies McClure mentions, are often based on 
actual films. For example, this one was based on a plane 
hijacking movie called The Concorde Airport 79. As a kid, 


131 


when we both first watched The Simpsons during the 90s, 
I just laughed at the funny title, not realising that it was 
referencing a real movie. So too, for the second movie 
McClure references in this segment, Hydro: The Man With 
The Hydraulic Arms, which again is just such a great joke 
title, so blatant in its obviousness, but again I didn’t know 
that it was referencing another real film, a 60s science 
fiction film called X: The Man With The X-Ray Eyes, 
which just makes it all the funnier. Jokes of our childhood 
redoubled as new jokes in our middle age, a gift that keeps 
on giving. 

We throw our rubber balls against a building that 
used to be an old boxing gymnasium, at the back of the 
last antique shop on the street I mentioned earlier, behind 
the electronics store I took a MiniDisk player once. There 
is a collage of bulbous graffiti tags there with a giant red 
robot rising above them, arms posed like it’s just finishing 
a workout at the gym, big white curved mouth like an 
astronaut’s visor. We aim for the mouth as if we’re playing 
a carnival game with those plastic rotating clown heads 
where you’re expected to deposit balls down their throats. 
I like the robot. When I first saw it here, some twenty 
years ago, I fantasised that it was constructed to take care 
of the city, a mechanised defender against external 
aggressors. 

We’re becoming less careful with our catches now, 
rarely making a clean catch on the full return but rather 
letting it bounce first, sometimes a couple times before we 


132 


lazily wander over to where the balls come to rest. Doing 
this across the city, against the side of banks, against the 
back of the Socialist Alliance, down through the wedding 
district, on the side of the conservatorium, the old Town 
Hall, reminds me of a scene from a book I read once 
where a lady, the last human on earth, travels across 
Europe and finds a Volkswagen van full of tennis balls at 
the top of the Spanish Steps in Rome. She releases 
hundreds of tennis balls down the steps, watching them 
bounce in all their variations across the piazza. It’s an 
extraordinary scene. 


The sky is getting dark as we circle back to his car. 
I spot a teenage lad pushing two teenage girls in a 


133 


shopping trolley down the street towards the harbour, and 
I realise I've previously seen this lad doing the exact same 
thing, a few weeks ago on a public basketball court behind 
the local high school, pushing two girls in a trolley. I'm 
unsure whether they're the same girls, but he's the same 
guy. I point him out to my friend and say I wrote a poem 
after seeing him the first time and imagined an ending 
near the harbour, a peculiar act of synchronicity given the 
direction he's heading now. I recite the poem: 


The speaker on the oval 
sounds like it really only 
fits, say, a pasta bowl of 
sound through its cone, 
yet the voice is trying to 
push through a bathtub 
of intense verbal growl, 
yelling in peak distortion, 
not sound wave so much 
as a brick of blunt noise. 


It is carnival day, teenage 
athletics, the whole school 
is there, well near enough, 
he’s decided to stick here 
on the basketball court in 


134 


audible range of the oval, 
just a croquet court for the 
elderly between them, he 
has watched a few games 
where the old timers take 


their earned time striking 
balls across the green like 
Alice in Wonderland, 1951 
original animation on VHS, 
he knows because of the 
scan lines, horizontal like 
he wants to be, streamed 

to mobile with AirPods in, 
floating in the background 
same playlist playing now 


to block out the sound of 
school spirit, not for him, 
who cares, look at where 
he is beneath Winter sun, 
the courts here pushing a 
trolly ferrying Louise and 
Sally, wouldn’t be caught 
dead at sport, twin noodle 
legs slung over the bars, 
teak hair ribboning as he 


135 


swings the shopping trolly 
in a broad arc, white teeth 
parted as hiemal air phases 
around them in a wash of 
outsider celebration. Later 
they’ ll huddle beneath the 
lighthouse by the harbour 
coated in abundant silence, 
near enough, only crackle 
from the fire and the sticks. 


In his car, we both apologise for not staying in 
contact more. He says he’s become a time thief, a thief of 
time; that’s how he characterises himself now. Across any 
given week, he’ll try to steal a handful of seconds and 
minutes, to take them away from his responsibilities, just 
so he’ll have a clear moment to be in his own head and 
think his own uninterrupted thoughts. Not the sort of 
thoughts you have when you wake in the middle of the 
night: those are always a disaster, the product of entropy 
and being horizontal. He means the thoughts you have 
when you stop the car on the way to work, just off the 
highway, and walk beside a river marshland for a few 
minutes. I say I get it (says the man who fell asleep on top 
of a gas silo and a soccer field). And this, throwing rubber 
balls against the side of big buildings, reminiscing through 


136 


Simpsons quotes, I get this too. There’s no need to 
apologise; this is what time does. 

We get a drive-thru dinner and drive around town 
for twenty minutes. I tell my friend to hook around past 
the community garden, and he says we haven’t even 
looked at your computer yet. Don’t worry, I say, it’s 
probably time for a new one anyway. We drive around 
King Edward Park, the lookout at Strzelecki, past James 
Fletcher Hospital, the ex-services club on Watt Street, past 
the train station my father used to work at (and his father 
before him), the signal box (where, as a young lad, I 
operated the crossing one day), on through the main drag, 
through the wedding district, right at the Interchange (with 
a milk tram passing by), and then up to Industrial Drive 
before merging left towards the Croation sports club. 

As we get close to the footpath of the community 
garden I can see, near the wooden cubbyhouse, a half 
dozen guys standing around an oil drum full of flames. I 
ask my friend to slow down, to get a look at what’s going 
on. From what I can see in the illumination of the fire, 
there are broken alcohol bottles scattered around the 
garden, and also the foosball table, split in the middle as if 
it had been jumped on. The box of wooden chess pieces 
sit nearby, and, as I look into the flames coming out the oil 
drum, I can see a castle and a knight sticking out the top, 
and also the wooden cut out of the worm wearing a hat. 
My friend turns his car around and drives past again, and I 
can see now the storage shed has been busted open and the 


137 


tools are all scattered. I say to my friend, turn the car 
around once more, so I’m on the side facing the garden. 

Reaching into the backseat, I take the laptop from 
my bag. It takes a lot of force to squeeze it out - the 
battery has constantly been swelling. I lean out the 
window and throw it, like an asymmetrical frisbee with a 
swollen thyroid, directly at the fire. It might be a result of 
the practice I’ve had these past few hours throwing balls 
at buildings that the laptop goes straight into the oil drum 
and, seconds later, explodes like cannon fire. 


138 


IV 


141 


Willow trees posed like fireworks in a state of 
suspended animation, paused mid-cascade, show petal 
flutter as embers above crushed dirt roadside trajectory. 
We’re somewhat racing against the sun, somewhat lost on 
the Yango Creek Road somewhere in Wollombi, and with 
our internet data not sending any new information to the 
maps on our phones, we’re at the mercy of the hills out 
here. Every ten minutes we see another house, but they’re 
unapproachable, set far back in pockets of bushland. This 
is definitely the road we’re meant to be on, my wife 
confirms the address, Yango Creek Road. We should be 
seeing the sign for a winery and then, behind that, the 
cabin we’re staying in for a couple of nights, convict built 
and owned for generations, now a rentable residence. 

But wait, we’re on Upper Yango Creek Road, and 
deep causeways filled with lakes of water every two 
hundred metres threaten to lift our car away from the 
traction of the road. This is not a road for cars, surely, at 
least not one like ours without a periscope. We keep 
turning around and returning the way we’ve come, sure 
we’ve missed a sign or a turnoff somewhere, before 
turning back around and continuing on the same road, the 
only direction left, to see the road through to its end. There 
is one particular causeway that keeps blocking us, deeper 
than the others - I’m sure we can’t get through it. We 
approach it again, and I look starboard and point out the 
first person I’ve seen out here for the past hour, a young 
boy of around eight or nine, riding a beat-up red pushbike 


143 


towards this deepest of causeways. 

He’ll never make it; what’s he doing. My daughter 
puts her window down to get a better look, so too my son, 
craning his neck to see what we’re talking about. The boy 
doesn’t even seem to register that we’re there. He rides at 
full speed towards the water and just glides on through, 
barely getting his bike pedals wet. Unbelievable, it can’t 
be that shallow. I have a feeling this will be like that scene 
from the 1960s film /ts A Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World, 
where a young boy shows Phil Silvers how to drive his 
convertible across a patch of river, stepping with light feet 
across the apparently shallow waters before Silvers drives 
in and immediately feels the car taken by the deep river 
and floated away while the tricky young boy waves 
goodbye. Regardless, I put my foot down and accelerate 
towards, and then through, the causeway, which is far 
deeper than the cycling lad experienced, splashing water 
up over our bonnet, leading me to think that he must have 
ridden on a raised ridge that only he knew about. 

Twenty minutes later, with only an orange rind of 
sunlight left on the horizon, we find the winery, hallelujah, 
and drive up to the cabin. The owner meets us and says 
they tried to phone, expecting us hours ago. Yes, I say, we 
drove for kilometres around Upper Yango Creek Road, 
and he says, oh man, you must have come across some 
deep causeways, that route is not meant for cars like 
yours, and I nod and agree. He says, you just needed to 
head that way, and he points in the opposite direction to 


144 


which we came, he says we’re only fifty meters from the 
main intersection in town, you must have driven straight 
past it. Oh well, that’s the way we’ll leave. 

He shows us inside the cabin, the basket of 
kindling and newspaper we can use to start a fire on a cold 
night like this one, the light switches, and gives a little 
history on the place. He provides advice, too, like if 
wombats come to the front door, we aren't to let them in. 
With all the rain out here lately, the wombats, who usually 
live amongst the winery's vines, have had their burrows 
flooded out, so they're looking for other quarters. And 
while it might seem fun to let a wombat in the house, trust 
me, he says, it takes at least four adults with brooms and 
much pulling and pushing to get the wombat back outside 
again. We all vow to not let a wombat in the cabin, and the 
owner bids goodnight and leaves us to unpack. 


—— 


145 


The cabin is wonderful - built slab walled from 
flitches split from local ironbark trunks in the 1840s, and 
there are etchings carved into the walls by the children of 
the original builder showing how tall they were growing 
across a couple of birthdays. After we unpack, we all find 
our sleeping quarters for the night. My daughter takes a 
single bed in the backroom by herself, my son and wife 
together in a double bed next door, and I take a little bed 
at the other end of the cabin in what used to be the old 
kitchen, sat beside a cast iron stove and the skull of a cow, 
with a little window that will catch the morning light at the 
bedhead. 

Early the following morning I get up, quietly creak 
across the cabin, and head outside for a wander. I start to 
get a better sense of the area, after our late arrival showed 
little, but still not a complete view as there is much heavy 
mist blanketing the tree line beyond the initial necklace of 
oak and conifer. In the yard, immediately outside the 
cabin, there is a round wooden table with four nestled 
benches beside a gas barbeque. Looking further beyond 
this point sees the road we drove up last night, while to the 
left is a pathway that leads to the vineyard and turning to 
the right leads to some uncertain point, a lemon tree and a 
boulder, but otherwise the landscape in that direction is 
too fog laden to clarify. 

I head towards what looks like a little utility shed 
sitting alone on a dewy slope. The air is full of birdsong, 
although at the time I could not name the performers. In 


146 


the same way I only have a glancing sense of the type of 
trees in an area, I could not pick the species of birds until, 
later in the afternoon, I looked through a guidebook in the 
cabin on local flora and fauna, and found photos and aural 
descriptions of the birds that matched what I heard that 
morning. Yellow-faced Honeyeaters, sometimes called 
quitchup according to the guide because of their two-note 
ostinato that sounds like ‘chick-up, chick-up’, fit the 
description for one of the most prominent vocalists. 
Listening to them trill reminded me of an essay I 
read some twenty years ago on birdsongs, when a 
presenter at a conference on the topic played a trick on the 
audience - they were apparently of the impression that 
extended birdsongs could not be realistically created 
through human composition due to birds unique, inhuman, 
capacity for improvisation - by playing a recording of a 
supposed bird that was, shortly after, revealed to simply be 
a recording of his own whistling, sped up using digital 
software, which, if anything, surely just reinforces the 
inhuman element to the structure of birdsong melodies. 
When I get to the utility shed, a mostly dilapidated 
weatherboard structure with no windows, I see on the 
closed door what look like pencil markings drawn over 
many times to make the lines bolder. A tidy script in all 
capitals reads PRINT ROOM, AUTHORISED 
PERSONNEL ONLY, beneath which sits an illustration of 
the three-pronged nuclear symbol and a sketch of an 
echidna, with the same script but smaller within the quills 


147 


which reads BY ORDER OF NORMAN. There are other 
versions, lighter and harder to make out, of the echidna in 
different renderings. One of them reminds me of the old 
World War 2 era graffiti ‘Kilroy was here’ which, 
positioned beside the nuclear symbol, might be 
intentional. 

Further down the direction I’m going, across a 
wide sloping field of increasingly long and wet grass, I see 
another structure, a half dozen beams supporting two 
broad sheets of corrugated iron above two rusted utility 
vehicles, one with a yellow cab and one without 
discernible colour. Beyond this point must be a river that, 
while out of view, is becoming increasingly resonant. I 
start to head towards it, but the ground is so slushy I head 
back to higher ground, to a dirt pathway that passes 
through a tunnel of trees. 

As I walk through this beautiful morning 
landscape, I daydream about what it would be like to live 
out here. In the same way that I feel like Newcastle is one 
crucial step removed from Sydney - a regional lifestyle 
separated from the bustling cosmopolis - this is a further 
step away, moving from regional to rural. Could I wander 
this route every morning, at peace with clockwork 
admiration of deteriorating physical structures, building up 
a catalogue within my mind of the surrounding flora and 
fauna so I could point out a leaf to my children and say, 
that’s from a narrow-leaved orangebar, or would I miss the 
stormwater drain, the concrete slopes of the government 


148 


buildings all empty on a Sunday morning. When I see a 
tree growing through the second floor of a collapsed 
tavern, is this where I prefer my trees to be, planted within 
the ruins of civilisation, rather than unspoiled, possibly 
tedious, abundance. Perhaps that is why I’ve mostly only 
noticed the constructed world out here rather than the far 
more copious, unnameable natural other. 

I take out of my pocket a packet of light-sensitive 
paper, cyanotype the packet says, given to me by my 
sister-in-law on some previous birthday. It is used to 
create, quoting the packet, ‘photographic type prints using 
sun and water’. I’d say there is just enough sunlight now 
for this to work, and I can see a little trough of water on 
the path up ahead, near the print room building ironically 
enough, the coincidence of the former, or current, function 
of that building only just now coming to mind with what 
I’m about to attempt. The instructions say to find an item, 
like a leaf or small twig, and place it within the provided 
materials, beneath an acrylic sheet and above a piece of 
cyanotype paper that sits on top of a piece of cardboard. 

A couple of minutes of looking for a suitable 
object on the ground and in the surrounding branches turns 
up a pair of splayed leaves fallen beneath a tree, one larger 
than the other, conjoined at their base by a forking stem. 
The way they are joined is interesting, not because it is 
unusual to see stems branch out in this way, but you 
usually see it, to my understanding, within a standard 
network of smaller, less developed leaves, not seated 


149 


within such a defined Y structure that support such large 
outgrowths. In a way, it looks as though one leaf was 
meant to grow there, but then two developed in a state of 
antinomicity. I press the twins within the sandwich of 
photographic resources, wait five minutes, rinse the blue 
paper in the little trough for a minute and then leave it to 
dry on the cardboard bed. What results is an x-ray that 
shows with precision all the fractal veins beneath the 
surface of the leaves, pressed with such gentle clarity by 
the chemical reaction. Thinking of which, I empty the 
trough of water just in case any latent chemicals remain. 


On the walk back to the cabin, I see my wife 
sitting in a chair on the porch. She is wearing her pyjamas; 
our kids must still be asleep inside. I take a seat next to 
her and we look out at the mist together, watch as it begins 
to scatter and dissolve with every new crisp, autumnal 


150 


sunbeam that emerges from above the tree line. She asks 
me where I wandered to - I describe the print room, the 
pencil sketches of the echidna, the utility vehicles, the 
sound of the river. We discuss plans for the day, what to 
make for breakfast, how the weather is looking, when to 
make a little trip into the local township. She reminds me 
about the boy on the pushbike who glides through the 
seemingly shallow causeway and we both laugh about it, 
relieved that we made it safely here last night before all 
the light disappeared. 

She asks me if I’ve given any thought to why I 
threw a laptop with a damaged battery into a barrel of fire, 
creating, essentially, a bomb in a bin. Have I heard if 
anyone was hurt, or what my friend thought of the whole 
thing, and whether anyone saw him drive away from the 
scene. I say I haven’t heard anything; it hasn’t seemed to 
make the papers, perhaps it was a non-issue. She asks if 
I’m just retroactively downplaying what happened, but I 
honestly don’t know. Perhaps I mistook the reaction after I 
threw the laptop into the bin, maybe I missed, the 
explosion could have been a fusion of the sound of a car 
backfiring and something else already in the barrel that 
caused a sudden burst of fire, if there even was a sudden 
burst. I really can’t accurately recall what happened. 
Maybe I exaggerated the whole thing in order to have an 
excuse to get away for a couple of days. 

My wife says, well, if you threw a laptop out the 
window of a moving car with the intention of it exploding 


151 


in the way you, either accurately or not, imagined - 
fantasised about in vivid description, when you told me 
what you thought happened - then you probably did need 
to get away for a couple of days. She looks at me and then 
looks out to the empty road we drove down yesterday. For 
someone, she says, who spends such a lot of time reading 
and thinking and remembering, you sure do some dumb 
things sometimes. You would think, she continues, that 
you would make better choices, but here are you, nearly 
forty and throwing laptops out of car windows. I feel like 
saying, and don’t forget, I’d spent the day throwing rubber 
balls against the side of apartment buildings after 
recording, and then time stretching, audio of a train to 
create a commemorative song for the opening of a new 
section of a community garden. But instead, I say, that’s 
the thing though, isn’t it - if I was any good at doing the 
right thing in the world of the living, then I wouldn’t 
spend so much time in my memories and my books. 

I see a sketchbook next to my wife, and I ask 
whether she’s been doing any drawing since she’s been up 
this morning. A little, she says, but mostly she’s been 
sketching and thinking about the rural childhood world 
she visits in her dreams. My wife grew up in [redacted], a 
couple of streets away from hectares of expansive, 
seemingly infinite bushland. When she was a young girl, 
she would be taken on walks by her grandmother, where 
both my wife and her sister would walk their 
grandmother’s two dogs a little way into the bush, just to 


152 


where the coal train line tacked against the edge of the 
trees. The trains would rarely roll through during the day, 
they mostly travelled at night, and my wife’s grandmother 
showed my wife and her sister how to tape two-cent coins 
to the track that, the following day, they would recover as 
little stretched copper bowls just wide enough to fit a 
raindrop in. 

My wife would always ask to go further into the 
bush, but they would never proceed beyond the train line, 
and it was not until some years later, into high school, that 
she and her friends would begin to go deeper in. They 
would push through the scrub in the direction of a metal 
water pipe that they’d then climb up and walk on until it 
reached a small clearing where wild horses grazed, where 
my wife and her friends would sit and draw and talk and 
watch the horses, spellbound, until it got late. A half- 
decade later, after a series of eye surgeries, she would 
return to the bush again, pushing even further in, where 
she found a dam and a raised hilltop that looked over a 
span of the area. 

It was not until she left [redacted] and moved out 
with me into our first home in her twenties that she started 
to have recurring dreams about the rural bushland of her 
younger years. The dreams were always exaggerations of 
her actual experiences, as dreams almost entirely are, but 
the embellishments were mostly ones of scale — for 
example, instead of coming across a moderately sized 
dam, it would be an immense inland lake, and instead of a 


153 


raise hilltop, she would ascend the heights of a mountain 
that, at its apogee, shepherded an array of fantastical 
horse-like beasts. This embellishment of scale makes 
sense, of course, given the impression of immeasurable 
vastness the bushland cast on my wife’s childhood senses. 
And I guess, too, you could put the recurrence of the 
dreams down to the impact this sense of otherness 
maintained on her across the years: a vision of something 
surreal, in the base sense of the word - the French word 
for beyond, sur, and real, réalisme - an image of this 
world but taken further into the believably impossible, the 
sort of experience that gives birth to artistry. 

We were talking about this dream version of 
[redacted] a week ago when we went to visit my wife’s 
parents, and for some reason that I cannot recall, we drove 
down a side street that veers off from the main road, 
towards the bush, perhaps in order to turn around or check 
out a business we thought we saw down there. She had 
never been down this road in all her years of living in 
[redacted], and as we got to the end of the street, I could 
see a rail line and, beyond this, what looked like the shore 
of a lake. I parked the car and asked if she wanted to get 
out and look with me, but she did not, so I quickly trekked 
across the rail and saw, with no word of a lie, a great 
inland lake, just as my wife had described it from her 
dreams. I used to work around this area some decade 
earlier as a teacher and thought I knew the area reasonably 
well, and I had no idea a lake of this proportion was out 


154 


this way. For a couple of minutes I just stared around its 
coastline, at the ropes set up by kids to swing into the 
water during the warmer months, at this irrational ocean. I 
took a photo to show my wife, but when I told her what 
I’d seen, she said no, don’t show me. 


She asks if I’ve been working on anything lately. I 
read her a poem I wrote the other day, based on a moment 
from the previous year, when our son was one, after he 
picked up a yellow bucket in our backyard during a 
particularly windy afternoon and threw it around his body 
in what seemed like an effort to catch the wind. 

It goes: 


155 


A small boy dressed in grey 
walks into the wind with a yellow bucket. 


He is unsteady on his feet as he is 
only a few months having learned the posture. 


The wind torrents with prestorm fervour 
and the boy swings his arms and yells 
as his bucket collects up the air. 


With repeated shouts the boy looks into 

the sky and causes me to wonder 

whether he is chastising the wind or joining it 
in its revelry, urging it to roar on. 


But then the bucket hangs still beside 
the little legs of the boy as the air 


goes quiet, perhaps answering his yells 


by whispering that it will not be commanded 
to blow by this young master 


nor will it be contained by his 
yellow wind bucket. 


156 


My wife asks me what I think the poem means, 
and I say something like it's just a lyrical description of 
youth observed. She then says that I have a peculiar 
relationship with nature, that I always have, that I've 
modelled myself somewhat after Faust, seeking to control 
nature as a way of emotionally transposing the passing of 
time. What I'm asking, she says, is what your wind bucket 
is going to be. This doesn't make any sense to me; I ask 
for examples. She shrugs, oh you know - the way you 
create a fetish of the constructed world, favouring car 
parks over natural parks; how excited you got, in a 
transgressive way, when you discovered the tree that grew 
through the middle of the dilapidated tavern more than 
you've ever been interested in non-dilapidated-tavern 
based flora; the way you mediate nature by enjoying it 
most through the window of a train; and the whole 
community garden thing, you don't know how to garden, 
to provide wildlife with the care it requires, so what do 
you do, you philosophise, you use nature for your 
metaphors and abstractions, and when the people at the 
garden ask you to write organ music to commemorate the 
garden, what do you do - you record the sound of a 
passing train. 

We hear our son, through the window behind us, 
begin to stir in bed. Soon he and our daughter rise, and we 
have breakfast together, watching a little wren tap on the 
kitchen window from the outside. Our son heads outside 
to look for where the wren is coming from, noticing it 


157 


bounce back and forth between the window and a little 
orange tree. There is a boulder behind the orange tree that 
our son clambers up on to survey the region, the fog 
having lifted now, revealing more of the map. 

For the rest of the day we explore the area around 
the cabin. Our daughter meets a black and white terrier 
named Charlie who lives at the nearby vineyard. They run 
around together, weaving in and out of trees, before 
Charlie stops and darts his attention down the dirt 
driveway where our son is riding his bike. It isn't our son 
that Charlie is interested in, however - it is the three young 
kangaroos bounding across the vineyard, over a wooden 
bridge that traverses a small river and into the 
neighbouring field. Charlie gives chase for two hundred 
metres before he stops in a tuck of dust and watches the 
kangaroo disappear through a line of trees. Either he has 
given up on catching them, or he's satisfied that his job is 
done. 

My wife and daughter set up at the wooden table in 
the yard facing the cabin, each with a sketchbook, drawing 
and talking while I take my son down to see the utility 
vehicles. With my phone, I take photos of him in the back 
of their trays, and he asks to see the pictures and then 
takes some of his own, of the sky, of his gumboots. As the 
day later comes to a close, we get in the car and, making 
sure to follow the right directions, we head into the little 
township nearby, where we stop at a pub for dinner. We 
notice a few points of interest we intend to check out the 


158 


next day — an art gallery, a café that looks good for lunch, 
and an antique store with a robot made of old computer 
circuit boards out front. In the pub, we find a table outside 
on the veranda so we can watch the sunset. I head to the 
bar area to get drinks for everybody and notice that the bar 
is in a separate room, nearly a separate building to the 
kitchen we order from. While I’m pouring glasses of 
water, I listen in on a joke the publican is telling a lady 
who looks like she also works there, she’s sitting in the 
corer sorting through what look like receipts or invoices. 
The publican tells the old joke about the church minister 
and the gardener. A church minister walks down a street 
and sees a beautifully tendered garden. The grass is like a 
bowling green - the flowers, glorious in their colours and 
their engineered bedding arrangements, smile their faces 
towards the sun, and the minister sees the gardener and 
says, oh, what a testimony to the grace of god this garden 
is. And then the gardener looks up and says, oh no, you 
should have seen this place when it was left up to god. 

The pub does a good dinner. My wife and I play 
cards while our daughter reads and our son flies a toy 
plane above the table. We carefully drive back to the 
cabin, in darkness, and go to bed. The next morning I 
wake up in my little bed beside the cast iron stove, single 
beams of blue morning sunlight flickering against the 
wooden walls and ceiling, phasing to a warmer hue as the 
trees that the sun is filtering through shuffle their fruit to a 
higher angle beneath a breeze building outside, bouncing 


159 


light against oranges and lemons which, to my delight, 
cause a glisten of shuffling refractions that dance back and 
forth as if against a surface of water. I think about the day 
ahead, about going to that antique store with the robot out 
front. The robot, standing some six feet tall, had, from 
what I can recall, an arm made out of what looked like a 
piece of farming equipment with pincers at the end, like a 
pneumatic hand that could loosen and tighten its grip. 
Lying here now, it reminds me of a robot I read about in a 
medical article that was created to facilitate remote 
gardening. The idea was that gardening is, for some 
people, a terrific therapeutic activity, and that it would be 
interesting to see the impact on patients who are unable to 
leave bed for many months if they were able to engage in 


160 


a bit of gardening. But rather than bring in a little watering 
can and a pot plant to the patient’s bedside, a group of 
technologists created a garden of some considerable size, 
located in a university hundreds of kilometres from the 
hospital, that could be tended to by the patient who would 
operate a remote control that activated a robotic arm 
positioned in the garden. The remote control sent a signal 
to the arm, via early internet, and told it to turn, dig a hole 
in the soil, turn again, pick up a packet of seeds, deposit 
the seeds in the garden, pick up a hose, and so on. The 
impact on the patients was apparently very positive, 
leading to results summarised by the researchers that, 
while nothing beats actually being amongst real nature, it 
is also true that engaging with a virtual nature is better 
than no nature at all. 

I ruminate on the conversation my wife and I had 
the previous morning on the veranda, when she made 
those comments about my relationship with nature and 
time. When I think back to that joke I heard at the pub last 
night, about the gardener and the church minister, the 
thing I take away from it this morning is almost a reversal 
of the intended punchline. The intention of the joke is to 
point out that, left to its own devices, nature is a tangle of 
unsightly mess, but that with nurturing, through culture, it 
can be made good. This isn’t what I think, though. What I 
think, is that before the gardener was present, the garden 
wasn’t anything - it wasn’t good, it wasn’t bad, it wasn’t 
correct nor incorrect. It was something beyond this, 


161 


outside of our judgement, our language. The presence of 
the gardener is the birth of subjectivity, and with it, the 
need to tell a story about nature that has a beginning, a 
middle and an end. A timeline. No way to get around it - 
our waking lives needs stories like our lungs need oxygen, 
otherwise they collapse. And what better stories to tell 
than those about nature - a veiled way of talking about 
ourselves without giving a face to our narcissism, and a 
way of talking about the passing of time as though it’s 
nothing to do with us. 

Once we are all up for the day, we head back to the 
little township and check out the antique store. My son 
finds an old tricycle, what my parents would have called a 
dinky - thin metal blue handlebars, white plastic seat, a 
plastic bucket attached beneath the rear for carrying a 
teddy bear. I show my daughter an eight-millimetre film 
projector, it’s in terrific condition. A label affixed reads 
Hanimex Pty Ltd Sydney Melbourne Brisbane Adelaide 
Perth, an Australian manufacturer or the store that sold it, 
I’m not sure. We talk about whether we should get it and 
play old movies against our garage back at home, hang a 
white sheet and create an outdoor cinema in our yard. I 
examine the parts, the lens. The owner of the antique store 
walks over and tells me that if I’m just interested in parts, 
and not the full projector, there is a box beneath the 
cabinet full of spare components. I look through and find 
an assortment of projector and camera pieces, little glass 
prisms and magnifying devices. My son taps me on the 


162 


leg, looking at me through a small field telescope that is 
missing something from its end, and he says, you’re 
upside-down (or, in his articulation, you’re upsy-down). 


The owner tells my wife they have some unique 
sculptures out behind the store, and shows her and our son 
and daughter the way there. I stay behind inside and look 
around. I’m starting to put together an idea for something I 
can build, perhaps. A rush of inspiration fills me, my 
memories of those Sydney days of the hackathon and the 
wearable device my team and I dreamed up, and my Apple 
days, too - I see myself rising up to the thirteenth floor, 
flying above the city, above distant countries, the runway 
in Denpasar, the Indian Ocean washing into the South 
Pacific, the beach downwind from the chemical plant 
beside the runway of the long-closed regional airport my 


163 


friend and I would sit on and talk; and a poem springs to 
mind, one I wrote while watching my son and daughter 
during a vibrant Summer sunset, infused with all the 
sensory pleasures of the season that activate within me a 
particularly wistful sense of longing and, why not just 
come out and say it, the sorrow of wanting to hold back 
the days and keep my children forever young. From a 
section towards the middle of the poem: 


Which evening is this, 

food descriptions of the sky: 
the sun directed upwards to 
caramelise the clouds hence 
sheets of foamed apricot with 
pink grapefruit frosting hung 
on the threads two kilometres 
above the Broadmeadow rail, 


and which evening is this one 
where my son sees the boom 
gate rise and fall like the arm 
of adherence, of compliance, 
or is this the evening in which 
everybody is still alive, or is it 
the one where only faint insects 
still patrol the bogey skyline. 


164 


From positively charged 
void to which evening is this, 
one month compressed years 
say yonks when my daughter 
and I rode our cargo bike to 
the grocery store for chips, a 
pack of the most spicy chilli 
danger snacks just borderline 


legal, and then we devoured 
them and exhaled fire up the 
narrow sundown corridors of 
Hamilton so our throats could 
enact conditions of sky, space, 
from black palette come light 
to roast the heavens, a Caspar 
David Friedrich history 


of clouds, a geneaology of the 
metaphor projecting up sunset 
moonrise vocabularies asking 

the question, which evening is 
this one dad. Up the motorway 
listening to the discography of 
The Beatles, at Coolongolook 

we pause for a plate of foamed 


165 


apricots dappled with a glance 
of pink grapefruit frosting, just 
enough to get us through until 
makinono that evening, topple 
into a booth, two bowls, a glass 
or maybe a couple more glasses 
please, my wife and I imposting 
our postures on arcade cabinets 


in that liminal arena bolted onto 
this cinema, never another soul 
there in our visits, only insects 
from the observatory, the sky or 
maybe a half dozen more skies, 
because which evening is this 
particular bracket of fading, and 
if I look around at thirty nine, 


how many years passed now 
since the sun fell all too quickly. 
Gravity has gone out of tune, the 
sun cannot leave although it has 
already departed, its image stuck 
in the evening sky like a ghost of 
phosphor lacking a luminescence 
as you See in computer monitors 


166 


with a bad case of burn in, a spot 
in the sky that still remains when 
night collapses form, what Hegel 
used to see at the end of his days, 
subject as object, nostalgic father 
as time wary son, because the way 
to keep two small pies warm for 
the ride home is to buy twenty 


and use the warmth of the many 
to blanket the couple. 


For the past week it’s been particularly rainy out. 
I’ve been tinkering in my garage with some of the 
components I picked up from the antique shop and some 
bits of circuitry I have stashed in boxes, things my friend 
and I used to mess around with in our younger days, and 
while I cannot fix the bloated battery of an overworked 
laptop, I can solder wires together and hook up electronics 
kits bought from hobby stores. I’ve had an idea for a little 
device — a wafer-thin projector, just big enough to fire a 
few lines of vision out of, with a GPS module the size of a 


167 


pencil eraser and a SIM card attached to the back. The 
idea is that the device can detect its location and search for 
any photos that you’ve previously taken there, and then 
project them out of the lens. 

My son and I return to the TAFE. Another 
Saturday morning ripe for exploration, up and down 
concrete stairs and ramps to where we came upon the 
foundry with all those offcuts of metal a fortnight earlier. 
Today my daughter has joined us, too - she wants to tell 
me about a movie coming out soon that she’s excited to 
watch. We have to be careful where we walk because the 
ground is dotted with puddles, just like it was the other 
weekend when my son rolled metal cylinders through 
them. At the moment, he’s jumping on a wooden pallet, 
rocking it back and forth across the uneven ground. I take 
a photo of him, and my daughter reminds me that she used 
to do the same thing here, ten years earlier. 

From my bag, I take out the little projector I’ve 
made. Seated on a waterproof shield, I carefully place it 
on the surface of a puddle, where it bobs like a little paper 
boat. It takes a half minute for it to turn on and pick up a 
signal, but then you can see it - a multicoloured light 
peeling out of the lens. The light from the lens skims 
across the water, touching down at an acute angle before 
ricocheting off and shining up at the base of the brick wall 
in front of us, creating a framed image the size of a 
postcard. As you bend down to get a closer look, you can 
see a shimmering flicker of photos, transitioning in and 


168 


out of each other as the puddle warbles. They are photos 
I’ve taken on this spot in the past — my son just now on the 
pallet, my son holding a metal offcut, my son on his red 
bike, and then the bike stretches into a scooter, my 
daughter refracting into view, my daughter at seven 
holding two small toy animals and dancing them across a 
piece of timber, my daughter in her preschool clothes 
balancing on a pallet just like the one before us now, and 
now photos of the area without my son or my daughter, 
just triangles of light and shadow, where I once gazed and 
thought of who knows what, perhaps my wife, perhaps 
dreams of my younger self, perhaps barely anything at all, 
distracted, recognising nothing of what would come to fill 
this seemingly vacant territory, a record of time adored. 


169 


Epilogue 


171 


I recently had an interesting experience involving 
scale. During my first afternoon of an interstate work trip, 
I came across a little Japanese-styled garden on the walk 
back from the office to the hotel where I was staying. It 
just seemed to pop out of nowhere - I had been walking 
through some light bushland that connected, across 
sporting fields, business quadrants of the outer CBD, 
when I noticed a wooden gatehouse made of two timber 
columns and thin slats of bamboo. 

The garden, shadowed by nearby administrative 
buildings for finance and the state department of 
education, only took a couple of minutes to walk around, 
and was an absolute sensory delight - waterfalls fed into a 
pond, which a sign notes is in the shape for the Japanese 
word for shin, meaning ‘heart’ or 'soul', surrounded by 
granite lanterns, a spill of conifer and pine trees threading 
between camellia and azalea plants, bamboo pipes 
clacking every couple of footsteps against rocks, and on 
the final turn back to the entrance there was a little open- 
air teahouse beside a sea of raked sand. 

It felt like such a treat to find this garden oasis on 
what was otherwise a routine and uninspired walk back to 
an empty hotel room after a day of computer screens 
bathed in pale grey spreadsheets. Little did I know that on 
the following afternoon I would, on a return walk back to 
the hotel, approaching from a different direction, come 
across another garden. At first, it looked like a sister 
garden to the Japanese-styled one, with similar foliage and 


173 


a waterfall near its entrance. However, it was clear that 
this park was many factors larger than the one I visited 
yesterday. For one thing, I couldn't determine where the 
park's boundaries were located - rolling hills of finely 
tended grass weaved footpaths across a duck-filled river 
far beyond what I had anticipated the depth of the 
environment to be. Pockets of trees with benches beneath 
and further groves of waterfalls, many with intricate 
fountains embedded, kept appearing at every turn. 

I had two books with me - a hardcover of Les 
Murray's posthumous poems, and Gerald Murnane's 
purported last work - which I had only expected to read 
either in the hotel room or on the plane home, but which I 
was able to enjoy here on a comfortable bench on the 
highest rise of the park that I had so far discovered, 


174 


cradled by a thicket of banksia and saltbush that housed a 
flickering kaleidoscope of butterflies. Every few minutes, 
I looked up from the books and across the expanse 
towards a silhouette of city as the sun gradually fell 
behind towers. This is the spot, I thought, that I will return 
to tomorrow afternoon on my final day here. I was looking 
forward to it all evening - waking up the next morning, 
getting through the work day, and heading back to this 
bench as soon as possible, good weather willing - until a 
brief conversation with a colleague provided me with a 
new plan. 

One of my colleagues came over to me while I sat 
down for dinner in the hotel restaurant and asked what I 
had been up to that afternoon. I told them about the park, 
and they asked if I meant the Botanical Gardens, as that is 
where they had been. It's possible, I replied - although I 
didn't see any signs giving the area a name, from their 
description it sounded somewhat similar. When I told 
them the direction I took to get there, they said no, those 
aren't the Botanical Gardens, they're at the other end of the 
road. I took out my phone and sure enough, the Botanical 
Gardens were located in an area I hadn't wandered yet. 
They opened at six in the morning, according to the 
description on their website, and from the current weather 
report it looked as though it might rain the following 
afternoon, so if I was to have a chance to visit these 
gardens before I flew back home I would need to go there 
before work. 


175 


On my walk there the following morning, just 
before six, I kept spotting fields and parkland that I was 
sure must be the gardens, and on a few occasions I was 
about to walk more closely towards them and enjoy what I 
could see, although something told me that I wasn't quite 
there yet. That 'something' could have been my body 
picking up on some sub-audible vibration of immense 
tracts of chlorophyll that were calling, some fifteen 
minutes further up the road, behind ten-metre tall 
limestone gates that ceremoniously welcomed visitors to 
the actual Botanic Gardens. Not that there were any 
visitors I could see so far, only a few minutes after 
opening hours commenced, as I walked into the grandest 
and most expansive garden I'd ever witnessed. 

The limestone gates were just toys rendered in 
miniature compared with the elm trees that dwarfed the 
entrance (and if the gates were made to look like toys 
from a garden play set, then what was I, not even a toy, 
just a little illustration on a sticker from the bottom of the 
box), creating an artificial night on this bright Spring 
morning, offering multiple tunnels of foliage to explore, 
of which I took an immediate right towards what looked 
like a latticed gazebo. Through the gazebo I could see 
more gates, these ones adorned with stone spheres, that 
bracketed a dark pond surrounded by further giant elms, 
Moreton Bay Figs, and what look like strawberry trees 
with sawtooth leaves the size of dinner plates. I keep 
thinking that the scene looks like something crafted in a 


176 


fantasy novel, anticipating a mist rising from the water to 
reveal a sword-wielding maiden lifted up on the head of a 
leathery water beast. A bronze plaque on one of the gate 
columns reads that they were erected in the fifties by the 
Australian American Association in gratitude for military 
support given by the United States during World War 2. 


It is apparent, even without having any real sense 
of the scale of the place, that this is not a garden to be 
traversed in a brief morning visit, or even potentially 
many hours of walking. The city is just a haphazard 
whisper barely recognisable only some minutes into the 
immediate layer of the garden, to say nothing of how 
quickly any sense of the outside world is forgotten as 
meadows unfurl towards glimpses now of sunlight on 


177 


hilltops, beyond the green canopies that have covered my 
walk so far. As I get to the top of one of the hilltops, I let 
my eyes trace the visible panorama to get my bearings, 
which only leads to a more wondrous state of uncertainty 
as an impossible vastness presents itself. I see a great 
sandstone manor sitting at the base of the meadow I'm 
currently on top of, a building that looks like it could 
house the great Moreton Bay Figs I've just been looking 
up at, only to see a tree just beyond this building, how 
could I have not seen it before, that stands a good three or 
four times the height of this now diminutive looking utility 
shed. Again, scale - like the feeling of considering the 
little Japanese garden compared with the parkland I found 
the following afternoon, now juxtaposed with the 
immensity of these Botanic Gardens, like nested 
Matryoshka dolls, so too the rising contrast between the 
grand gates at the entrance with the figs that dwarfed 
them, this sandstone manor with the tree that lives above 
its rooftop, and what beyond here, who is to say it doesn't 
just keep getting bigger the further you go in, a volcanic 
ridge above the trees, a temple with a bridge to the moon 
at its apogee. I half expect to look down at my watch and 
see the hands spinning like a compass above a magnetic 
pole. 

Sprinkled around the gardens, sometimes in the 
middle of an open field, other times standing in the middle 
of a necklace of trees or standing on platforms at the 
mouths of ponds, are classical Greek-styled marble 


178 


statues, not actually made from marble but rather a 
smooth-grained composite. They are the visual equivalent 
of running a wet finger over the rim of a crystal glass of 
water, resonating a bell-like, almost alien tone, that clears 
an aesthetic space amongst the rough edges of the flora 
via the presence of these portraits of immaculate 
smoothness. More buildings too are found after turning 
down a pipeline of wisteria - a glass cube housing water 
lilies, a white panelled dome that rises via an infinite 
parabola, and another glass building, a hot house gilded in 
yellow and deep blue matrices of framework that follow a 
critical symmetry of form. The sun is high enough to fill 
the building with light dazzle, like noon sparkle on salt 
water, and it is already very warm inside, or perhaps still 
warm; it might retain its heat overnight. There are varieties 
of cacti, mainly from Madagascar, inside, although it is the 
glass panels I keep looking up at, feeling their magnifying 


179 


warmth on my skin. Perhaps I too am a cactus, here, ready 
to be planted for a century. 


Being in this hot house reminds me of standing in 
the butterfly garden in Singapore airport some years ago. I 


180 


arrived at the airport at around seven in the evening, 
thinking that I'd given myself just enough time to get 
through check-in, only to realise that I had miscounted 
and actually had many hours, into the very early morning, 
before I would be taking off. This didn't worry me, though 
- it was a thrill to realise I had all this time up my sleeve to 
explore what was immediately apparent as not a standard 
airport terminal. After looking in at one of the many 
cinemas, layers of sleeping pod stacks, multi-story 
restaurants and towering geometric statues of water and 
light, I caught a glimpse of a sign pointing to the butterfly 
garden and was delighted not just with what you'd expect 
to find in there, but also that you could see outside to the 
tarmac where a Boeing 777 and Airbus A350 sat waiting 
for their cue. I stared at this visual dichotomy for twenty 
minutes, this split between the artificially natural flora of 
the garden - tiny, naked white butterflies flitting between 
synthetically orchestrated fern canopies - and the naturally 
artificial birds outside, folded in light-weight aluminium, 
lavishly adorned pilots seated behind their eyes, above 
their beaks, waiting to part clouds. 

All night I wandered the airport, occasionally 
running into colleagues from the work conference I'd been 
at that week, eating dinner at a music-themed restaurant at 
nine o'clock only to forget about that meal and have 
another dinner after midnight at a barbeque grill eatery on 
a high balcony overlooking a hive of bars and interactive 
entertainment venues. I took trains that ferried passengers 


181 


back and forth between terminals, through gaps in the 
walkways, between jewellery and high fashion outlets, 
with no idea which terminal I was at in relation to the 
others. For a good two hours I walked around to see if I 
could find a way to get some fresh air, any sort of opening 
in this place, eventually finding a winding stairwell that 
led to an elevated outdoor area with a bar, a smoking area, 
and a tall neon cactus. I looked at a couple sitting there, 
opposites in every physical dimension possible, including 
his Winter attire and her tropical kimono, and wondered 
who they were and what their lives were like sitting here 
in this impossible location, an area only just discovered 
and illuminated by consciousness, never to be seen again. 
Did they too feel this sense of scale, forever expanding. 


182 


A month after the work trip that saw me in the 
Botanic Gardens, I travelled interstate again, further south 
this time, to a beautiful little town where I helped present 
a workshop for a special education school. It was not quite 
snowing there, but it felt like it had the potential, that 
waking up the following morning could reasonably 
witness a sheet of white cover the region. During the 
course of the two-day workshop, I overheard the principal 
of the school struggle with staffing. They had just lost a 
teacher to another school only a day before the term was 
set to begin, and the principal, who I had met some years 
earlier at an autism conference, was ringing everybody 
and anybody to help cover the class temporarily until they 
could re-interview for a replacement as soon as possible. 
After a phone call home to my wife, and then to my boss, I 
took the principal aside and said that, if he'd like, I'd be 
happy to stay on for the rest of the week and cover the 
class, if that helped give a bit more time to get someone 
more permanent in. They phoned the pub I was staying at 
and had them extend my stay until the weekend, and with 
that, I was heading back to my room that afternoon to start 
preparing a few lesson plans. 

I don't quite know what it was that made me offer 
to help out - I'd like to think it was by virtue of wanting to 
do the right thing, helping someone out, particularly the 
kids at the school, in a time of need. Maybe it was that I 
missed teaching and wanted to show myself that I could 
still do it, or perhaps I wanted a bit of an ego boost, to feel 


183 


like I had flown in here with my exalted career in my 
wings, ready to save the day. But quite honestly, I think 
the primary motivation was to have the opportunity to do 
this, right here, to sit in a cosy pub of an evening, beside a 
fireplace, and look out the far window at dark fields and 
sparse townships with billowing chimneys. I missed my 
children and my wife, but it was only for a couple more 
days, and I had a project, other than teaching, that I 
wanted a little time for. 

Since thinking about my experience of scale in the 
gardens and at Singapore airport, I began pondering the 
organ composition that the coordinator of the community 
garden, next to the Croatian sports club, asked me to 
compose. It wasn't just the polysemous nature of the word 
scale and drawing a connection between a sense of 
physical dimension and the span of musical scales, but 
instead I'd had a vision for a pipe organ composition that 
was not just for one organ, but for three. The idea came to 
me as I flew back into Newcastle after the gardens, 
looking down into the city and noticing three car parks, 
some of the tallest physical structures in the CBD, that 
were all set for decommission, ready to be torn down for 
new apartment buildings. 

It will come as no surprise that I have enjoyed 
many walks through these car parks over the years. One, 
in particular, the Bolton Street car park, gives the most 
uninterrupted view of the city that can be found anywhere 
around and has been a source of inspiration to me many 


184 


times (my first attempt at a novel was birthed at the top of 
that car park, and features prominently in the story). To 
think of it being torn down filled me with grief and 
fostered the idea of perhaps involving it, and the other car 
parks, in a piece for multiple pipe organs. 

The idea is this - each of the three car parks has a 
large surface area on its top floor that could readily hold a 
specially constructed pipe organ (and, with cranes 
occupying every city block, it would not be difficult to lift 
the required materials up there). Also, the car parks are in 
line of sight of each other and, with only a half dozen 
streets between them, the sound of each organ would carry 
between them so they could harmonise and play together. 
The composition would, then, be written for three pipe 
organs, to be performed at sunrise, with an organist seated 


185 


at the top of each of the three car parks, trumpeting a 
volley of wind-blown chords across rooftops. I would call 
the piece Scale. Whether the community garden folk 
would accept this as suitable to commemorate the 
construction of their new planter beds was a question for 
another time. 

Looking through my photos today, now back at 
home after that week of teaching, which I'll finish on in a 
moment, I realise that perhaps I wasn't just inspired to 
work on the organ composition because of a curious sense 
of scale that had recently enveloped me, but also perhaps 
because of what I was looking up at each morning as I 
waited for the bus to pick me up from the pub and take me 
to school. 

The awning of the bus stop was a sheet of 
corrugated iron, beneath which someone had painted a 
yellow sun with a smiley face. Undulations in the sheet 
look like columns of metal pipes, not unlike an organ I 
used to play on during my student days. How could you 
not sit beneath this awning, looking across the road to an 
icy river with a platypus swerving its way down to the 
reeds, and not feel a kinship with Bach. Rather than 
composing in the shape of a church, though, you write 
music to inhabit the peopleless gaps in city streets. 

I enjoyed my week of teaching, and one moment 
lingers in my mind - a high school student, preparing to 
give a talk on a project, turns and says, Mr Smith, wish me 
tight lines. At first, I didn't know what the phrase meant, 


186 


but then I learned the student loved fishing, and to wish 
tight lines was to hope for good luck. That feels like the 
best advice a teacher could hope to give a student, to say 
nothing of wisdom for parenting. 

Tight lines. I wonder what my version of this 
would be. Wish me empty multi-story car parks, perhaps, 
with, at times, a little companion by my side, and the 
grace to recognise that, like air moving through a pipe, I'm 
just passing through. 


Hamilton, November, 2022 


187 


Ae anes 


STIS Swe, 


ES kc 


188 


| eh Ces 


189 


Craig lives in Hamilton, New South Wales 
with his wife, daughter and son. He is a 
school teacher and is the author of the novel 
"A Complicated Surgery Will Take Place On 
The Beach Tonight' and the filmed essay 
"Beyond Correct and Incorrect Nature’. 
This is his third book. 


193 


Abrachas Publishing 


