Everyone I Love is Alive in the Unlimited 


Present of the City and its Waters: 
an essay on four incomplete poems 


Craig Warren Smith 


Copyright © Craig Warren Smith. 
All rights reserved. 


The moral rights of the author have, 
to a cursory extent, been somewhat asserted. 


Wwww.wrenasmir.com 


2025 


Abrachas Publishing 


To watch a video of me hanging around 
Newcastle and narrating an unabridged 
version of this work, scan the QR code above. 


In recent times I have found myself being 
increasingly honked at as I cross the road. I don’t 
know if I’m taking more risks or whether I’m just 
not judging my timing as well as I used to. Perhaps 
I’m just giving off vibes that drivers are none too 
pleased with. 


As well, in the past couple of weeks, when I hold 
bottles of water at certain angles I have found 
them making a sudden metallic thud. When I 
inspect the bottles, I confirm they contain only 
liquid, no solids whatsoever. This has happened 
with multiple bottles of different makes and 
materials. 


I saw all the pretty faces 

all at once; they 

did not see me, my rhythm 
that goes like this../--\.. 
(when you speak that aloud, 
make a sound like a dream is 
accelerating and then not). 


I’m of the mind that we only arrive at what we’re 
looking for by way of failure. Not in the sense that you 
have to fail to succeed, by trial and error, but that the 
failure is the revelation, the failure is the endpoint - it 
is the moment where the thing becomes what it was 
always going to be. When city planning collapses into 
a network of dead ends and empty courtyards, those 
urban glitches become the only places worth 
inhabiting. The intention dissolves, and meaning 
appears in its place. 


There is a line of reason suggesting that the lived 
experience of our everyday reality is the surplus 
remainder created by the failure of the impossible 
fullness that we imagine sits behind our reality. It’s 
what we feel we are trying to reach, but cannot access, 
and as a result, it creates a gap. It is this gap that gives 
form to our world. 


This is not a bike, it’s a non-thing 
and likewise in the lifeworld 
my daughter and I do not sing 


with the gaps in our heads, these 
are not bodies on an e-bike 
streaming to the nightharboured seas 


The only successful poem is the one that exists during 
the period of daydreamed intention before it is put 
into concrete form. Once it is written into being, it 
loses whatever possibility it had, even the very good 
poems. Some, at best, regain a glimmer of their 
potential when they are quoted, as an incomplete 
fragment - just a few lines - in, say, the introduction 
of a book or a piece about the life of the poet. It is the 
failure of these poems to contain their intention that, 
when removed from the context of their fullness, 
gestures towards their unattainable ideal. 


As for me, I am still dripping wet from the morning 
shimmer of the Tasman Sea after taking a swim, 
healing from a sleepless night when the sound of a 
screaming cat, which I have not been able to identify, 
split the air and sent me into a bout of insomnia. It is 
a balmy day, and I am drying fast beneath a palm tree 
in the courtyard of a kiosk that just served me four 
warm doughnuts and a can of carbonated guarana. 


Text message: You remember Daisy, the opera 
singer. We visited her while she was house-sitting 
one night. The place on the hill, she took us up onto 
the roof. Do you remember, we bought cigars for 
Mark’s birthday on the coast. We listened to 


Orbital on cassette all the way down. I liked her 
but never told her. She probably knew. Anyway, 
let’s catch up soon. 


This essay is in reaction to not being able to write 
four poems that I planned based on four recent 
journeys on my e-bike. Bach said that when 
playing an instrument, all one has to do is hit the 
right keys at the right time and it plays itself. This 
essay is in reaction to not being able to hit the 
right keys at the right time because the keys are 
long gone. 


and this is not a city but its 
metaphorical remains, all those dark 
window panes - glass was to be 

the material of the future in stark 


disavowal of deception, only truth 
as the lifeworld of office living 
was observed from the outside, 
cooking in the kitchen, forgiving 


in the bedroom with the TV on - 
but now the glass is in our hands 
for now, we won’t need our hands 
soon, another non-thing gone. 


My daughter and J are not bodies 
but information streaming 
towards the lighthouse at Nobbys. 


Text message: I just want to make all the 
people I fall in love with laugh forever. 


Text message: Are trees memories? 


My teenage daughter is currently into ‘object 
shows’, internet animation series that feature 
things as characters. From one particular show she 
is describing to me as we ride across the city 
tonight, her favourite characters include the 
number nine, two, four, the algebra symbol x, a 
needle, a golf ball, a flower and a teardrop. She also 
tells me about characters from other similar 
shows, including an exclamation mark, a 
paintbrush, a marshmallow, and a notepad. 


It is said that we live in an age of non-things. 
Byung-Chul Han, quoting media theorist Vilém 
Flusser from the 1980s - “Non-things are currently 
entering our environment from all directions, and they 
are pushing away the things. These non-things are called 
information”. Our bodies have become abstracted. 
We don’t move through the physical world; we 
hyperlink through cyberspace (could there be a 
more nineties way of describing the internet?). 


This year was the 30th anniversary of the movie 
Hackers. “We have just gotten a wake-up call from the 
Nintendo Generation”, says Cereal Killer, hacker alias 
in the movie for Emmanuel Goldstein, the 
namesake not only of the figure of resistance in 
George Orwell’s 1984, but also the pen name of one 
of the editors of 2600, a hacker quarterly 
magazine. 2600, of course, being the hertz 
frequency at which the toy whistle in Cap’n 
Crunch cereal produced that, when played into a 
payphone, indicated to the AT&T phone network 
that the trunk line was available to make a long- 
distance call, for free. 


Yesterday, my six-year-old son and I stopped in at 
my mother’s house to say hi, and I found a box of 
my old video games there, including my first 
console - the Atari 2600, so named for its hardware 
component, the CX-2600 (Atari video game 
cartridges have similar naming conventions - 
Combat was CX-2601, Space Invaders was 
CX-2632, Adventure was CX-2613). Why 2600? An 
homage to the toy whistle frequency that 
established the myth of the hacker as the magician 
cowboy of our age? 


Text message: Yesterday my neighbour called 
out to me through his kitchen window as I was 
returning home from a walk. He knows I can’t 
hear him through the window. I said what did 


you say. He said something again that I 
couldn’t hear. I half-laughed and said say it 
again, I can’t hear you man. Then silence, then 
he appeared on his concrete landing that looks 
into our yard. He said, mum died yesterday. 
Like Camus. Hier, maman est morte. 


He said his mother liked me, and then he said 
you know, I’d say she loved you. 

From what I can remember, she only really 
noticed me when I left the bins out too long. 


I gave him my condolences. He said it’s these, 
man. These cigarettes, a lifetime of these. This is 
what killed her. He said this as he was holding 
one from a pack, about to light up. 


One of the shows my daughter watches includes a 
character who is a toy whistle. It was one of the 
contestants in a game show episode, along with 
Mario and Luigi hats and a kite. As we glide 
through the night city on my e-bike, we cross 
footpaths, roadways, and parklands, up hills and 
down ramps, without the textures or gradients 
altering our momentum even slightly. It is as if we 
are part of a shared lucid dream, flying across the 
city in some abstraction of physicality not 
dissimilar to how we scroll across websites and 
algorithmic video feeds. 


Are the objects in the shows that my daughter and her 
generation watch in opposition to the non-objects, the 
non-things, that dominate our waking subjectivity? Are 
they a reaction to watching the world through a screen, 
through digital art made inside a screen - is this some 
yearning for object fetishism to assume form? They sell 
merchandise of the characters from these shows: one of 
the objects in the show is a school bag, and you can buy 
a school bag that is the school bag. You can buy a golf 
ball that is the golf ball. For Christmas, she is getting the 
algebra symbol x. 


Text message: Can you get milk? 


On a community-run Object Show fandom wiki page, 
documenting all manner of object show media, the 
header title for the page contains a spectrum of colour 
that passes through the LGBTQ+ rainbow, Trans Pride 
colours, Progress Pride, and some associated non- 
binary, genderqueer and aromantic shades. It is also 
notable that these shows appear, at least in my 
daughter’s telling and my own reading into the online 
communities that flourish in this world, to particularly 
appeal to neurodivergent folk. 


Is there a relationship between the abstraction of the 
body in the Information Age, of transitioning the 
physical world into an online cyberpastoralism, and the 
prevalence of neurodivergent representation, queer 


culture (I think particularly of the Tumblr days, 
when gender linguistics became somewhat 
mainstream), all these fluid ways of representing 
the self - neurospicy, pangenderflux, otherkin and 
fursonas - beyond the need for a body? 


There has been much said over the past ten years 
about the level of anxiety and self-loathing that 
screenagers have experienced by way of the selfie 
camera and comparing themselves to the selfies of 
others, but I don’t see this in my daughter’s online 
life (not to say it isn’t there; it just isn’t as 
prominently displayed). She and others who 
partake in the online communities aforementioned 
- the neurodivergent, the genderqueer, plus the 
Discord servers of Object Show enthusiasts, Sonic 
the Hedgehog web comics, horror indie game 
development and horror podcasts (horror, the 
lifestyle mode that a generation of post-9/11 iPad 
kids who were exposed to too much of the 
unpleasantness of the world too quickly through 
Elsagate on Youtube Kids, much like Rotten dot 
com before, have transmuted their trauma into 
existential digital violence) - seem more invested in 
the creation and swapping of visual art illustrated 
in Ibis Paint than photographic representation of 
the body: one more way to distance the body from 
the physical, from the always-returning gap. 


On Discord, as on Tumblr, 
users divide and multiply 
what information age 
bodies cannot elucidate, 


secret sensory perceptions 
like when you squint into 
corners of light, geodesic 
tessellations impossible 

to put into words, 


(this is critical: the impossibility 
of putting something into words 
establishes the perfect conditions 
for turning the world into words) 


this is where my daughter lives 

in a lifeworld of body abstraction, 
of non-bodied enterprise (the 
selfie is dead, who wants to look 
at the faces of the non-bodied) 


Every generation virtualises the self. In the 1960s, my 
father walked through the city at age ten with his 
mates, stopping in at the Beaches Hotel on Watt 
Street to be served a complimentary glass of lemon 
squash by the Bearded Lady and others in the 
travelling Freak Show who served behind the bar 
during the wet season, en route to one of the half 
dozen cinemas showing cowboy movies every Sunday 


afternoon - they'd show one at 2pm and one at 
3pm, one ticket would get you two films - by which 
he projected himself onto the screen (he was the 
cowboy, the gunslinger on the opposite side of the 
world {in fact, the cowboys were closer than we 
might imagine: US soldiers were still training on 
the sand, in the parks down by Horseshoe Beach, 
the Navy Base, during this post-war period, where 
my father and the same mates who were earlier 
served by Lionel the Lion-Faced Man would pick 
up bullet casings from rounds fired during twilight 
drills}) in the same sort of silver screen daydream 
that would eventually flatten light in the home, the 
bedroom and the 56k modem. 


Text message: We stopped on the way back 
from Byron at my grandparents’ farm. We were 
low on fuel, we put the windows down and 
crawled along the backroads. There were fires 
everywhere. I am responsible for the farm now, 
the animals. 


The dream of 90s internet felt like a democratic 
revolution was coming to life - ‘A Declaration of 
the Independence of Cyberspace’ penned by 
lyricist of the Grateful Dead (and, cattle rancher, 
who the Paris Review accurately described as a 
Space Cowboy) starts like this: ‘Governments of the 
Industrial World, you weary giants of flesh and steel, I 
come from Cyberspace, the new home of Mind. On 


behalf of the future, I ask you of the past to leave us alone. 
You are not welcome among us. You have no sovereignty 
where we gather.’ 


No borders, no boundaries, no bodies. Now, thirty 
years on, I ride this e-bike with my daughter on the 
back, and we are not bodies either: we are information 
streaming, frictionless across the city (external 
landscapes always mirror our internal geography; 
they're our talisman). My identity is composed of the 
paperbacks that comprised my teenage years, objects 
you can't find on shelves anymore around here 
because the last bookshop in the city has just gone up 
for sale, they're just text files now, where I spend ten 
hours a day of my waking life; my daughter’s lifeworld 
lives in the echo of my teenage 90s cyberspace, within 
its deep and sudden strata, where it is always 
midnight somewhere, schools and families asleep, 
dead to the world; and my young son - well, who 
knows. 


My favourite Australian authors are the poet Les 
Murray and the sentence writer Gerald Murnane. Les 
Murray had an autistic son who went to one of the 
schools I work with, and catalogued his own 
neurodivergence in such poems as ‘Portrait Of The 
Autist As A New World Driver’ (“A car is also a high speed 
hermitage, questioning who would put in a telephone, that 
merciless foot-in-the-door of realities”). On Gerald 
Murnane, the term autistic has been used frequently 


in description of his presence and writing, 
although he himself has never registered it as part 
of his identity (only that, in response to Ramona 
Koval putting to him that ‘there are people now 
who write about such feelings of being a little bit 
separate from the world and making lists and 
making lots of categories and would say that that’s 
a slightly autistic way to be in the world’ Murnane 
responded ‘I may be that way). 


Text message: I found the Les Murray quote 
you asked about. This is it, straight copy paste. I 
used to refer to them as the humans, you 
know - ‘what are the humans thinking 
about’ - seeing myself as a bit of a stranger 
to the human race and trying to work it 
out. That’s the line I think you were looking for. 
I found it on a blog. My question is, doesn’t 
everyone feel this way? Is there any other way to 
be? That’s me all over. 


Is this not what the dawn of the Romantic Age 
was, of people too sensitive for this world putting 
down onto paper, in concrete form, a simulation 
of the observed world to establish an artistic gap 
between what was too severely felt and the 
daydream fantasy of being able to share that 
sensation with others? The cruel cliche of the last 
half-century of the autistic lifeworld was that it 
was characterised by a lack of empathy. We now 


know that it is not a lack of empathy, but 
potentially of too much empathy, of feeling the 
world too much, of its sensory and emotional 
abundance, that leads to a filtering of information; 
of compressing it onto the page, into the screen, 
into the gap between the self and the world. 


Primary sources void. 

To be happy is to forgive oneself 
for existing, for a while. 

Nature will not tolerate miracles 
that drag on into tomorrow. 

Love is all that you don’t give away. 


I’m sitting in a restaurant gathering these last 
couple of lines from a notepad, and I’m watching a 
couple, a young woman and a man, eat Thai food 
with the father of the young man. The woman is so 
gregarious with the father, sharing anecdotes and 
laughing. When the young man speaks up, the 
young woman looks quiet, distanced. The young 
man is uncertain and tries to sustain focus on his 
drink. The young woman hopes the young man 
becomes a man of confidence and substance and 
gentle revelation. Look at the father - he has 
survived, he enjoys lunch and dessert. Only later, 
when the young woman walks to the bathroom, do 
I see that she’s pregnant. 


My daughter and I stop the e-bike when we hear 
music coming from up above. We turn towards the 
honeycomb of rock strata and see three young folk 
wearing masks - possibly wizard masks, or the face 
of Bin Laden - dancing to the Macarena. Only, they 
don’t know the Macarena dance moves. They know 
that the Macarena is a cultural artefact from the 
past, a meme from the centrifuge of the modern 
day, the 90s, but they haven’t studied the 
choreography - they're just feeling it, putting their 
hands palms up to the ceiling of the world, data 
drunk, waiting for us to film them and make their 
simulacrum complete. We do so, and post it 
Reddit a few minutes later. 


I am recovering, this morning, by way of a series 
of swims - first at the Bogey Hole, which the local 
tourist board describe as Australia’s oldest 
purpose-built ocean pool, although I wonder how 
this catalogues with our First Nations people (in a 
lineage of slave labor that necklace the pyramids 
and the Hanging Gardens of Babylon, the Bogey 
Hole was handcut out of the coastal shelf in 1819 by 
convicts tasked with delivering colonial Major 
James Morisset with a personal oceanic wash tub); 
and then, to the Newcastle baths, where there is 
such a glorious display of young revelry, the school 
year effectively over, the water filled with 
backflipping bodies, the air with careening 
footballs, that I am brought to consider how all of 


these people here today (sunbathing, sitting on the 
steps nursing babies, a ring of folks from a 
disability service playing a game of frisbee near the 
steps, elderly swimmers with bodies they've been 
carrying around for eighty years today floating 
and treading water with their flowery caps on, 
teenagers in the early throes of semi-aquatic 
mating rituals, forty-year-old authors struggling to 
keep their balding heads out of direct sunlight) 
feel, to me, on the literal and figurative edge of the 
nation, like everybody here is outside of history. All 
the politricks and ideologies on the mainland, the 
technologies, the grammar - somehow it’s just for 
those people on the television, on the internet, 
back there in the glass encampments of the city, 
not here in the sunlit water. We are escapees of 
history, outside of time, outside of theory, but 
utterly and completely in and of our bodies. There 
is little more physical than this. This is the 
antithesis of tactile abstraction. We here, in the 
water, are wrapped in touch. 


Last night, my wife and I dined with friends. I 
don’t remember much of the conversation - I think 
one of my friends described being tested for sleep 
apnea, and we all made fun of him. What I do 
remember, on the periphery, is a stream of 
cocktails that kept coming in from the side of my 
vision - sometimes from the east, sometimes the 
west - and landing either in front of me or in front 


of my wife. At some point in the night, I stopped 
throwing quips into the conversation and just 
stared, docile-like, at my wife’s face, lovingly but 
also with a sense of vacant time-stretched wonder: 


that crest of cartilage, that 

transition of teak fringe 

into a glaze of gelatine blue eyebulb, 
lip phase, the skull that sits 

like a memento mori on her shoulders 
above the hewn ridge of her collarbone, 
where models pour pools of milk 

to then drink up through a straw. 


My staring reminds me of a phrase Byung-Chul 
Han uses in his essay ‘The crisis of narration’ - he 
talks about how modern readers have lost the 
capacity for “the long, slow, lingering gaze”. For Han, 
as for Walter Benjamin before him, the 
information age has delivered a diffuse media 
landscape of so many million-petalled attractions 
that draw us in, often from positions that carry no 
resonance for our daily lives except that they offer 
spectacle - 


I must interrupt myself here to note that a man 
with a little dog has just caught my eye twice, 
intentionally, by staring down at the little pile 
of books I have beside me here - ‘The crisis of 
narration’ and, another essay by Byung-Chul 


Han, ‘Non-things’, as well as a hardcover of 
early Australian poetry I picked up the other 
day, ‘The Wide Brown Land’ - and he asked me 
what I’m doing, that it looks like I’m writing: I 
said I am, and he asked me if I’ve ever written a 
book of my own. I said yes, a couple, and he 
asked what I write about - and, for the life of 
me, I couldn’t form a cogent answer. At first I 
said Newcastle, and he said well you can’t help 
that, look at where we live, and I agreed; then, I 
said I guess I write about a slowing of time, 
perhaps, and he said well, there’s no use in 
rushing about, and I agreed; then, he said 
farewell and he and his little dog walked away. 


- where was I, back to the spectacle: so, for Han as 
for Benjamin, we no longer place importance in 
narratives told around the campfire. Narratives, as 
opposed to stories: a narrative contains wisdom 
that relates to your life, because it comes from 
your history, your lineage, part of your family and 
community, something to learn from, deeply, and 
take with you (that’s the long, slow, lingering gaze, 
both into the fire of the wisdom-pregnant 
narrative but also into the amplitude of yourself). 


A story, in contrast, is a news report about a fire in 
another country, a social media reel about 
whatever - it isn’t a narrative that stretches beyond 
the momentary spectacle, even if the fire is part of 


climate change and connected to a narrative arc 
about the industrial age and the ozone layer all the 
way back to indigenous patterns of nomadism and 
environmental care, re: is it actually feeding into 
the wisdom of how you internalise the meaning of 
your existence and those you temporarily love? 


One thing that interests me in this line of thought 
is whether our future is unwaveringly one of 
perpetual, increasing fragmentation. It feels like a 
line can be drawn between population growth, 
globalisation, the philosophic handshake of East 
and West, and the move across the past two 
centuries towards multiplicity: 


-no facts, only interpretations (Nietzsche); 

- whatever satisfies the soul is truth (Whitman); 
+ we're just animals, like all the other animals 
(Darwin); 

- if no god, then is everything permitted? 
(Dostoyevsky); 

- reality is bent through the prism of our 
unconscious drives (Freud); 

+ we live in a rainbow of chaos (Cezanne); 

+ truth is mathematically incomplete (Godel); 

- language disguises thought (Wittgenstein); 

- Iam made and remade continually (Woolf); 

+ in a world that has really been turned on its 
head, truth is a moment of falsehood (Debord in 
‘The Society of the Spectacle’, 1967). 


After dinner, my wife and I take a group selfie with 
our friends (or, a ‘wefie’ as one of our Singaporean 
friends terms it), and then we head out into the 
heat and dark of night on the back of my e-bike. 
She hangs onto me, arms around my chest, as we 
cruise up Bolton Street and Watt, around the 
sweep of King Edward Park towards where I 
returned this morning to swim off last night 
(which I’m talking about in the present tense) - the 
Bogey Hole. Feeling physically inclined, we bathed 
as a light wind whipped a swell across the fringe of 
the pool. Again, I dwelt in that long, slow, 
lingering gaze as my wife and I stood on the rocks 
and let the moonlight drip us dry before getting 
dressed and mounting my bike. 


This is a morning of interruptions. Someone I 
knew from a previous job, a stint at a radio 
station, has just come up to me, looked at my 
sausage roll and announced ‘A butcher's 
breakfast’. I say I’ve never heard that phrase 
before, only a ‘tradie’s breakfast’ because they're 
up so early. Same thing, he says, butchers are 
up early with bakers and tradies and all the 
rest. 


He tells me that he used to work as a butcher's 
assistant some thirty years ago. While in this 
role he got the signature of one of his heroes, a 
local daredevil stunt man. Some years later, 


after a stretch of profound neurological pain, the 
stunt man took his own life. 


After, this chap telling the story told me how he 
was sitting with friends having a drink and they 
were talking about whether any of them would 
have the courage to end things if life got bad 
enough. They all told him, this chap telling the 
story, that, out of all of them, he definitely didn’t 
have the balls to do it. He didn’t have the guts. 
Well - he’d show them. 


On the back of some extensive drinking, this chap 
decides to get in his car and drive very fast, way 
too fast. He points where he drove, down a long 
stretch of road by the beach. As his car was about 
to leave the road and soar off an embankment 
into a tree, he suitably panicked and climbed into 
the back seat. Then, everything turned white and 
he heard a voice say - ‘Take care of your children’. 


The next thing he knows, he’s covered in blood 
and an older man is hovering over his face. The 
older man pushes a bottle into this chap’s mouth 
and says, drink. 


Later, at the police station where he’s being 
booked, this chap tells me how he flirts with the 
police officer there, the woman doing his 
paperwork. He also recounts how this flirtation 


was brought up in court later, which he felt was 
unnecessary. 


In finishing the story, this chap tells me again 
about how he still hears those words - take care of 
your children - sometimes, when he least expects it 
to pop into his head. He says that, all told, he 
probably has three kids out there in the world, or 
likely four if the spies are doing their job. I get the 
sense that the care he has provided those children in 
the intervening years is likely questionable. 


What Han is channelling with Benjamin is nothing 
new - any student of modernism can recite how the 
trajectory of the 1900s was one from totemic certainty 
into an infinite remixing of culture and meaning that 
destabilises any opportunity to feel the ground 
beneath our feet. But the thing I keep returning to, 
personally, is whether this is a one-way path without a 
chance to undo, like when you realise how a magic 
trick is done and can’t later regain a sense of illusion. 


Does the unfurling of our self-consciousness, over 
centuries, mean we are forever stepping further and 
further into fragmentation? That we are constantly 
breaking the stable certainties of meaning and 
narrative of our lives into smaller and smaller pieces 
that cannot be reformed, any more than we can enjoy 
the magic trick after we learn the mechanics of its 
trickery, or after someone explains a joke? 


And, critically, are we developing technologies that 
manifest this ongoing fragmentation of self? The 
small printing press that distributes poetry 
chapbooks and zines, the means of artistic 
production localised in the bedrooms of a 
generation of laptronica creatives, the server farms 


that stretch across the horizon 

into cyberpastoralist evening glow 

as they vibrate however many trillion 
blogs and video diaries (and how long 

will they be kept for? When will the photos 
and videos and music in the clouds 

we rent from expire? Will 


the Internet Archive hold it all? 

Gardens full of suitcases 

buried beneath the topsoil, full of geobyte hard 
drives 


{a geobyte is equal to 1024 brontobytes, 

and a brontobyte is equal to 1024 yottabytes - 
the Internet is estimated to be around 

one yottabyte big. 


For scale, one yottabyte is equal 

to around a trillion terabytes. For further scale, 
DNA, if suspended in water 

via nucleotide data encoding, 

holds around 215 petabytes of data per gram. 


One petabyte is approximately equivalent 
to one thousand terabytes. So, for extra credit, 


how many teaspoons of water would you need 
to hold a garden full of geobyte hard drives, 

if the garden is, say, three by seven metres wide 
and a half metre deep?} 


containing copies of all downloadable copies of 
everything ever - are these technologies developing 
in response to these new infinities of perspective, 
or are they manifest in our own awakening, 
inseparable from the terraforming of our internal 
landscapes: as the self becomes more self-aware, 
fragmentation ceases to be a symptom. It rather 
becomes the structure of all possible experiences, 
and all that we imagine and create. Aristotle 
wrestled with this - was everything one, or was 
everything infinitely divisible? What is at the 
centre of reality, something stable or fluid? Or, 
something else, something unimaginable even 
today - a gap. 


We are told that so much of our internal and 
external lives are unimaginable - there is too much 
data, too much complexity, how can you even 
know yourself when your own mind is 
impenetrable, all those half-misunderstood 
theories of childhood development and the 
subsequent production of the impossible and 


contradictory adult world, all those politicians and 
billionaires who live in another dimension, the 
depletion of bookstores, no more poetry books 
available on the shelves of Newcastle Public 
Libraries, and even if they were, poetry is 
inaccessible: no longer the plainspoken news 
broadcast of The Charge of the Light Brigade, no 
longer the memorable if ironically misunderstood 
Road Less Travelled, today’s poetry is only discussed 
in the inner circles of the internal sanctum of 
university courtyards, and the only way to be 
admitted is to admit you know nothing, the highest 
form of Socratic wisdom - but, maybe we can 
understand. It might not really be as complicated as 
all that. Perhaps we can understand ourselves just 
fine; maybe it’s easier than we think. Or not. 


When we ride away from the Bogey Hole, I tell my 
wife I picked up a copy of a book called ‘The Bogey 
Hole’ by Barbara Coombs the other week, at the same 
bookstore I got ‘The Wide Brown Land’ from. It tracks 
a family narrative from 1818 to 1972. I tell her the 
Bogey Hole is central to the plot, like when you're 
playing squash and told to always return to the 
centre of the court, that’s the role of the Bogey Hole 
in the narrative. My wife says, what. She can’t hear 
me. The wind is too strong - shirtless, I glide over 
Strzelecki point and head over the rise towards Bar 
Beach as my wife wraps her arms around my chest. 


I feel the wind, I feel her skin on my skin, fine 
hairs on coarse, gradient curves on vertical 
densities, and I am aware that everything from the 
day before, of the abstraction of self, has dissolved 
into unbridled bodiness - hang on, sweetheart, and 
feel the chambers of my heart fill up with the fine 
spun whirring of angel whispers billowing into 
lifeblood and meaning - say yes to simple 
dichotomies, to being a man in the holocene, to 
knowing the self, to having a body, and don’t tell 
me that I’m only feeling this way because of the 
internal disruption to my stabilising chemical 
balance. I don’t know what any of those words 
mean right now. 


I know you were expecting 

a confetti of shareware ghosts 
with all the numbers pressed 
into footfalls of cardiac swoon 
but all I have is a silent delay. 


I saw all of the pretty faces 

all at the same time - the 

clock face on its sandstone rise, 
the chrysanthemum in their 

static firework softly pleated cores; 
and then, yours. 


My grandfather used to swim at the Bogey Hole 
every day, regardless of the season. He and my 
grandmother lived at the top of town for many 
years. My father often shares with me a cavalcade 
of mythic Newcastle-centred stories from his 
childhood, all set within a couple of blocks of his 
house, some of which I’ve recounted in this essay 
(the circus performers serving him and his school 


mates at the hotel on Watt Street, picking up the 
discarded bullet shells from soldiers engaging in 
drills near Horseshoe Beach - just the other day, 
dad told me about how he used to watch racehorses 
swimming in the water off Horseshoe Beach, the 
trainers would give some of the local men with 
dinghies a couple dollars to hook their horses up to 
the back of the boats and row in front of them to 
provide resistance training {note, Horseshoe Beach 
was not named after this activity; it’s the shape of 
the beach}); and now, after my own life spent in the 
city (as a young lad eating at the Coles cafeteria on 
Hunter Street with my mum, watching the little 
coal cart do revolutions beneath the clock in the 
mall as the little miner on top hammered the bell 
every quarter hour; teenage years, university days 
and nights writing for a street press in the city, art 
gallery crawls with bohemian associates; now, as a 
domestic adult) I have introduced my two children 
to its bite-sized labyrinth of streets. And, to the 
Bogey Hole, where four generations of my Smith 
lineage have bathed in its coastal waters. 


The other day, I rode into Newcastle from where I 
live in the suburb of Hamilton (for context, it’s a 
ten-minute ride) after shirking off the 
responsibilities of work for the day, with the 
intention of spending my time riding and 
wandering, reading and writing, to try and get a 
foothold on a new book I’ve been tinkering with. 


After a couple of years working on shorter pieces - 
novellas, essays, poems, plays - I decided to 
commit to something more substantial, a book- 
length work of singular focus. My first in six years. 


‘Their Most August Public Organ’ is the working title 
I’m going with - I have around three hundred 
pages of notes, made over the past twelve months. 
I even have an epigraph that I caught after 
watching a trailer for a video art project by a 
German-based media guerrilla collective, Total 
Refusal, who use up-cycled video games to engage 
with critical theory - “The hand, which tolerates no 
chance, transforms a living system into a controllable 
object and invents the wilderness in order to subjugate 
it.” All I needed was to start writing the work itself. 


On another similar day, thirteen years ago, with a 
background intention adjacent to this one, 
although arguably, beneficially, more aimless, I 
likewise threw off work and went into the city. 
That day, last decade, was perhaps the most 
significant of my creative adult life: it was the 
moment I felt like I inherited Newcastle as a 
psychogeographic laboratory, walking it into 
meaning and nurturing that meaning into prose. 


I had a head full of W G Sebald and his ‘Rings of 
Saturn’, although without any plans of my own to 


write a book - I simply looked for the quiet corners 
of the city and found everything I was looking for: 
winding walkways of broken concrete snaking up 
branch shadowed hillsides I’d never encountered 
before at the rear of art deco building complexes I 
was only marginally aware of; abandoned hospitals 
in groves of dense trees, slowly being turned into 
robotics warehouses; and, the crumbled jewel of 
the afternoon, the ruins of the Jolly Roger pub, 
where I easily trespassed through a flapping balsa 
wood boundary and found myself in a dreamlike 
quadrant of decimated brickwork and steps that 
rose onto a second storey of dilapidation where 
mature trees breached the gaps in the flooring and 
pierced where the ceiling would have been. 


Urchin: Issue 5 - Winter (2005). 


Welcome to the Fifth Symphony of Urchin. 
Contributors from all across Newcastle have 
once more sent us their thoughts wrapped in 
words so that we may give you an idea of what 
Novacastrians are contemplating and creating 
these days. 


Winter has decided to visit our town again for a 
few months. Beneath this heavy night-time sky 
I can hear the rain pour down like a flood of 
thick brown coffee as it warms the dreams of a 
sleeping world. This feels like the perfect 


weather for reading the pieces of writing 
published here. During the weeks and months 
before Winter, these compositions were jotted 
down in weather more balmy than this. 


Many of our pieces mention early morning and 
sunshine in a way that allows us to prove that 
more temperate times did exist in Newcastle, just 
in case Winter should decide to never leave. Just 
in case our harbour freezes over and our streets 
are smothered in snow, we will have an historical 
document making claim to a time when we could 
walk the streets at dawn without catching the flu 
and when we could lick as many sign posts as we 
desired without getting our tongues stuck. 


As far back as I can remember, I have wanted to 
both write books and compose music. When I was 7 
or 8 I told my parents I was working on a text called 
‘How Life Works’. They said it felt ambitious for a 
young boy to commit to a project with such a broad 
focus, but I thought at the time, why not now? I’m so 
close to the start of it all, to the starting gun of birth, 
to learning how to write complete sentences - surely 
it’s easier to write a book about what it is to be alive 
at 7 or 8 than when you accumulate the weight of the 
following years and have to take into account all 
manner of learned complexities that any given adult 
hour adds to the strata and architecture of it all. 


Midway through my university degree, after 
publishing some stories in the student magazine 
Opus, I heard about a local street press named 
Urchin. It was located on the second floor of TPI 
House (The Totally & Permanently Disabled 
Soldiers Association Of Australia), across the road 
from the Conservatorium of Music in Newcastle, 
where I learned the pipe organ during high school, 
adjacent to Civic Park, on which I used to gaze 
from a high window instead of practising my 
scales. I turned up one night for a meet and greet 
and began contributing to the following issue. The 
issue after that, I was the editor. 


Yesterday was not today. 
How many yesterdays 

do you need, given the 

way they disrobe and 
misremember tomorrow. 
So you kissed her last night: 
what brings you back now? 


After the publication of my first piece in Urchin, a 
letter arrived at TPI House addressed to me, 
saying how much they enjoyed what I had written. 
The letter had been produced on a wonky 
typewriter, signed by someone calling themselves 
Avis Birtles. I was well chuffed to receive what I 
considered my first piece of fan mail (and, 
regrettably, arguably my last) and decided that I 


would like to keep it and put it on my shelf at home. 


Absolutely not, I was told by the kind but official 
administration assistant - this is Urchin property, 
we might want to publish it or add it to the archives 
for future use: hands off. This didn’t sit right with 
me, as the letter was addressed to Craig Smith and 
was in response to work I had personally written. 
So, I pocketed the letter, took it home and placed it 
on my organ music stand for however many years 
until I moved out of home. 


On this most recent day that I spent by myself in 
Newcastle, riding and walking in search of 
resonance towards commencing ‘Their Most August 
Public Organ’, 1 couldn’t help but compare its 
outcomes to that day thirteen years ago when I 
ended up in the ruins of the Jolly Roger. Not long 
after that day, looking back on the photos I had 
taken on my wander through the ghosts of the city, 
I sat down at a desk in my backyard over the 
Summer and began to write what became my first 
novel, ‘A Complicated Surgery Will Take Place On The 
Beach Tonight’. I had inhaled the city, had started on 
the top floor of a multistorey carpark and, piece by 
piece, brick by brick, had eaten my way down 
through the carpark, onto the terrace homes, the 
alleyways, the trees, all the way to the beach at the 
end of the world / Newcastle to then wash it all 
down with salt water. 


A Complicated Surgery Will Take Place On The 
Beach Tonight: Chapter 1. 


I extend a profound friendship to all that is 
fleeting and undefinable and incomplete. Better 
living without geometry. 


I used to believe there was a foundational concrete 
mathematical reality that must reside at the centre 
of the world in order to provide a platform for some 
unknowable, unspeakable truth to stand atop so as 
to give our daily reality its solid form. It would 
take some years until I realised that each time I 
thought I could hear some truth at the centre of the 
world I was actually only listening to an echo 
rising from the centre of myself. 


Aimless walks are a gift. These past couple of days 
I have been mostly successful at extracting myself 
from the bedroom so as to topple out the front door 
and onto the street where I bounce down octaves 
towards the triangular shards of light in the quiet 
parts of the city. 


I am still surprised at just how many spaces I 
come across for the first time which for an area 
that only stretches some five square kilometres feels 
like a curious personal oversight. Just yesterday I 
visited the site of an old pub I had never seen before 
that is in the late stages of natural deconstruction. 


In contrast to that day, spent in a Sebaldian dream 
of the city, my recent venture involved less 
dilapidation and more gentrification. The city of my 
grandfather is gone, so too that of my father, and 
now the city of even last decade has been smoothed 
over: the empty multistorey carparks I so cherished 
and took my son through only a couple of years ago 
are now demolished and either replaced or in the 
process of being replaced by stark apartment 
complexes. 


The opportunity to walk through some half-finished 
daydream is all but gone - instead, I ate Korean 
fried chicken and drank rice wine at a nice little 
venue that has replaced an old City Council 
information centre (when I was in primary school, I 
used to go in there to get maps for school 
assignments) and then I went into a bookshop that 
has replaced the luggage room in the train station 
my father and his father worked at. 


Gone, too, is the ease with which I turned on the 
linguistic firehose in my mind thirteen years ago. 
There was immense pressure behind the hose back 
then which had been building for years, and I found 
a way, shortly after, to turn on the hose and let the 
contents out of my head and onto the page. Today, 
the pressure is still there (a relentless desire to turn 
the world into words, that form of neurodivergence 


aforementioned that transmutes, via countless 
hours of self-imposed isolation, an oversensitivity 
to life into a moderated simulation on the page), 
but the ability to turn on the hose is not so readily 
achieved. Or, less abstractly, this city no longer 
inspires me as it once did. 


I’ve written over a hundred thousand words on 
Newcastle since that time. Now, as much as I am 
still drawn to the streets, I can’t help but wonder if 
I am motivated more out of nostalgia than the 
potential of instigating something new here. I find 
myself looking back a great deal these days, and 
yet I know that anything I end up creating of value 
will not be tethered to the past, but will be 
fervently invested in some unimagined future. 
That’s what I was looking for recently, somewhere 
in the city. Unable to locate it, I did what I do a lot 
these days - I turned away from the streets and 
went for a swim. 


And girls who want to know 
something about the moon. 
Well, we used to live up there 
before it became a backdrop 
on pinball machines and two 
dollar trinket chests, dolphins 
jumping ‘neath rainbow arcs: 
Lost dog signs, evening barks. 
Old beaches, new carparks. 


Love is all you don’t give away 
(and girls who want to know 
how to dissolve on the freeway). 


Yll tell you something that fascinates me about 
time. That note I received from Avis Birtles, typed 
with mechanical arms and black ink, on a piece of 
white paper: it turned off-white a couple of years 
later. Looking in a drawer right now (I’m sitting in 
my office at present, on a hot Summer's night, 
listening to ‘Music Has The Right To Children’ by 
Boards of Canada) I see a couple of old artefacts 
from decades past: a photo of my _ great- 
grandfather on my mother’s side; a letter sent by a 
friend during our teenage years; a paperback 
Hermann Hesse novel from the 1960s - they are all 
yellowing, discoloured, curling up at the corners. 
Time has impacted everything I hold in my hands 
here tonight, as well it should. 


But consider an online blog written thirty years 
ago, archived perhaps from an Angelfire or 
Geocities or Xoom site: when you bring it up today 
on the screen of your MacBook, there are no 
detectable signs of physical aging. Sure, the GIFs 
have compression scanlines and the minimalist 
design options are a sign of 36.6k modem load 
times during the late 90s, but the text on the 
screen is as bright and crisp today as it was back 


then (likely more so). It’s almost too basic to point 
out - aesthetics aside, the pixels on your monitor 
today will render digital assets of the past just as 
they did when they were first produced. Their bits 
are timeless. They do not age like objects in the 
physical world because they are held in a state of 
eternal suspended animation. 


The challenging part of this is that there is no 
sense of distance from one digital object to the next. 
No gap between past and present. A retro video 
game from the 80s, like on my childhood Atari 
2600, can be played using emulation software on a 
computer today alongside a similarly designed 
game from this year and they will look identical: 
the Atari game will not have yellowed, will not have 
depleted its colours or curled up its graphical 
borders, because it is now part of the world of 
digital infinities. 


When distance is rendered obsolete within the 
media that comprises our cultural landscape, our 
awareness exists in a permanent state of 
immediate proximity. There must be a gap 
between the traveller and their destination, 
between the passage of time from one moment to 
the next, otherwise we can only think within a 
space that Grafton Tanner calls Foreverism and 
Mark Fisher referred to as the “slow cancellation of 


the future”. What genuinely new ideas can be given 
air in this space? Instead of progress and revelation, 
we are stuck inside a cultural hamster wheel 
recycling digital infinities en masse - no new 
movies, just remakes and sequels; no new music, 
just remixes and interpolations (or, as is happening 
this month, human cover versions of chart-topping 
AI songs, as if the End of History wasn’t already too 
on the nose). 


The butterflies and the marigolds 
are ontologically incomplete. 
Similar news on a nearby star: 

It goes without saying - go again. 


And, the challenge facing me as I return to 
Newcastle for inspiration, thirteen years after my 
original revelation: to conjure new forms of prose 
that can break through the modernist loop of the 
last century. The tired techniques of fiction, 
inventing characters that the omniscient author 
moves about on a pretend stage to say more of the 
same, decade after decade; gonzo autofiction and 
pastoral essay; but where are the new thoughts, 
concepts so disorienting that it doesn’t seem 
possible that a human in our age could have given 
them air within the linguistic frameworks and 
economic incentives we supplicate? Anxiety of 
influence, hauntology as market aesthetic, dead air 
time. 


In part, this challenge of creating something new 
out of the foreverist loop we collectively inhabit, 
infused with all the digital infinites we continue to 
accrue, strikes me as something that I wonder if Al 
can help solve - not through coming up with its 
own new ideas, as AI is the ultimate nostalgia 
machine, the final remix of human intelligence, 
taking all that we’ve ever made and feeding it back 
to us a trillion times over without finding a fissure 
to breach some wholly novel invention. Rather, I 
want AI to challenge us by underlining the parts of 
our humanity that are all too readily standardised. 


When, in some quarters of our present society, we 
become frustrated that AI has been tasked to 
mirror another special part of our human potential 
- writing poems, connecting with others, falling in 
love - we might rather see this inertia as a call to 
action: what of our humanity can we retain after 
the parts of us that can become standardised are 
all-too-easily committed to algorithm? 


Have we not been guilty of, for generations, living 
through such normative templates of social 
production that we have intentionally made 
ourselves ripe for automation - the generic 
patterns of small talk, career aspirations, 
punchlines, hobbies, work requirements, birthday 
card messages, consumer profiles, wedding vows, 
trajectories through the ebb and flow of life and 


death at the End of History, replayed endlessly in 
front of our eyes from every vantage point, 
teaching our dreams how to fit the formula, the 
right duration for a length of music, the right 
length of a book to sell for the recommended retail 
price: at the risk of victim blaming all of late-stage- 
capitalist humanity, if AI has been able to 
duplicate our creativity too quickly, perhaps we 
didn’t do ourselves any favours by colouring 
within the margins of our potential for so long. 


So then, what if we actively let AI replicate the 
parts of our standardised humanity that easily slot 
into market templates, and then we take stock of 
what’s left behind, the gap between our geometry 
and our irregularities, the parts of ourselves that 
can’t be emulated - yet, even if they can’t be 
emulated yet, as the arms race between our unique 
human capacities and what can be reproduced 
through software will be, for the rest of our lives, 
in a state of technological tension - if we can 
unearth brand new, special, undiscovered parts of 
our humanity and house them in a window of 
subjectivity beyond replication, then a twin path 
into the future may open up. 


On one path, we the people may strive onwards 
towards historically unrealised human capacities; 
on the other path, across the valley, we 
simultaneously allow computers to move beyond 


anthropomorphism and become an_as-yet- 
unrealised modality, tasked not with mirroring 
humanity through relatable Chat Bot dialogues but 
instead allowed to become something beyond our 
language, allowed to become raw quantum 
artefacts of computational energy that do 
whatever what they do with no relation to what is 
within our human heads and hearts and sensory 
systems. 


Between these twin paths - in the valley between 
our irregular human ingenuity and computers 
operating beyond the status of doppelganger - will 
be the soup of inevitable artificial replication that 
cannot help but automate what can be automated. 
If a technology exists, it will fulfil the outcome of 
its invention. Our job may be to come to peace 
with this and learn how to walk in another 
direction while another direction still exists. 


Someone knows the name of this tree 
on the footpath - where I see 

a tumble of green 

they see an overwatered pine. 


Where I see a pole with departing wires 
and cannot tell if electricity fires 

or calls connect, 

someone else knows the design. 


I think about all of this while I float in the waters of 
the Bogey Hole (it’s the following morning now, not at 
my desk anymore but writing at a table near the beach, 
with my bike), in this gap between the light-void 
universe above the ceiling of the world and the fires 
that drift the continental shelves far below the fish 
that parry the soles of my feet, and wonder what 
creativity can be exhumed from the remains of the day 
in Newcastle. When I lift myself up on the rocks that 
necklace the pool to stand and dry in the sun, I am 
surprised to see none other than the administration 
assistant from all those years ago at Urchin. 


Penny, I say. A quick calculation - 2005, 2025 - twenty 
years, almost to the month. Good god. She recognises 
me too, we embrace and she introduces me to a friend 
she’s with, a man the same age as both of us with a 
tremendous amount of hair around every part of his 
head, extending in all directions. This is Avis, she says. 


I’m taken aback. It can’t be. The same Avis Birtle who 
sent that typed letter twenty years ago that yellows ina 
drawer? I ask him straight out and he guffaws 
massively, yes that was me, he looks at me with 
astonishment. All those years ago, what synchronicity. 
Heck. Penny doesn’t remember, and I don’t bring up 
how I pocketed the letter, not that it matters now. We 
absorb the chance circumstances of our meeting 
before Penny invites me to join them, they’re going to 
the pub for a drink - absolutely, I'll join for sure. 


We wander along to one of the many Northern 
Stars in the neighbourhood (within a constellation 
of pubs, the same lodestar appears fractured in 
shards across the city) and reminisce about the 
past. How is Malcolm doing, oh he’s lecturing at 
university on digital media, friendship and 
LGBTQIA+ online experiences; what about 
Samantha, she’s editing poetry journals; and 
Terrence, did you hear about the plagiarism 
episode, revoking his literary prizes, oh man. What 
about Bronte, yes she’s working for a sustainable 
farming collective, oh that’s right I met Bronte at 
an event last year, she’s amazing. 


Avis only contributes occasionally; if it wasn’t for 
all the hair, I’d question whether he was really here 
at all. Penny does most of the talking, I respond 
and joke where I can. She’s as electric as she was 
back then. I remember, as we're talking, that 
although she was formal and official in her 
administrative capacities, she was quite wild after 
hours. A painter in Cooks Hill depicted her nude, 
front and back, in a diptych that was displayed in a 
gallery on Auckland Street, and she posed in a 
similar capacity for numerous photo sessions that 
were included in Zines at the time. She was a lot of 
fun to spend time with. I remember we went to a 
circus performance one night and she put on a 
faux French accent the entire time. It feels like 
yesterday. 


Upstairs, above us, we hear applause and laughter. It 
doesn’t sound like a television - we go to check it out, 
wondering what could be happening up there. We 
head up a winding timber staircase and find only 
accommodation until we see a birdcage hanging on 
one of the doorknobs, the door propped open, with a 
sign that says ‘Hermes’. Penny is the first to poke her 
head in, then she gestures us through the door. 
There are around fifteen audience members 
watching a two-person theatrical performance being 
given in this room, this pub accommodation. 


We stand at the back and watch. One of the 
performers, a man, recites a line to the woman - 
“Two lone glad doves are sighing on the roof’. As it goes 
on, we learn that this is a play depicting the lives of 
Australian writers Dora and Bert Birtles (Birtles! 
What?), specifically the period in 1923 when both 
Dora and Bert published love poems in the Sydney 
University paper about each other - Dora’s, ‘Moon 
Shadow’ (“All the neighbours know // What hour you 
come, and when you go...”) and Bert’s, ‘Beauty’ (“let // Me 
kiss your mouth, your eyes, your forehead, // And kiss your 
breasts”) that resulted in Bert being expelled and 
Dora being suspended. We all applaud at the end, 
some fifteen minutes after we arrive, and make our 
way downstairs. 


On the way back to the bar, it occurs to me, as I 
reflect on Dora and Bert reenacting the past in front 


of this fellow who wrote to me all those years ago, 
the like-named Avis Birtles, that perhaps the 
future doesn’t just remember the past - it 
auditions it until a version finally fits. History is 
not a timeline; it’s a boomerang, with the future 
arcing backwards into the past to give yesterday a 
meaning it couldn’t have possibly inherited if it 
weren't for tomorrow. 


I want to ask Avis if Birtles is really his last name 
or just a pen name, but I leave it. He and Penny 
have to go, they're heading to see a band play at the 
Lass O’Gowrie: they invite me, but I decline. I still 
have a few things to do before then. Penny says to 
me, Well, you'll have something to write about now - 
how fantastic was that! And meeting us: I want you to 
dedicate a chapter to me. I say, of course. Surely. Maybe. 
Who can tell. It was so good seeing you, and meeting 
you, Avis. Take care. 


I said Maybe, but I meant Maybe not. Big, strange, 
unexpected events like this aren’t what fuel me - I 
want the quiet, unspoken moment, the glance of 
sunlight in the unpopulated courtyard that means 
something to one person alone. All of this was 
wonderful, no doubt - it was so good seeing Penny, 
and so bizarre and satisfying to connect with this 
Avis character, and the spontaneity of the theatre 
performance upstairs (part of the Fringe festival 
going on in the city, I later realise). It should all 


look so good on paper. But the future isn’t done 
with me quite yet. 


Back on my bike, I ride past a bookstore I used to 
frequent all the time during my university years - I 
found almost all of Hermann Hesse’s 1970s Picador 
translated paperbacks there, while my best friend 
collected Robert Heinlein from the shelf above - 
and then circle back to take a look inside. They 
have a few poetry books I put under my arm (Koch, 
Larkin, Auden), and then I see something that 
almost makes me drop them all: a thin, neat blue 
paperback with gold letters pressed into the cover 
that reads ‘Survivors of BEAUTY. Memoirs of Dora 
and Bert Birtles. Deirdre Moore. Book Collectors 
Society of Australia’. 


Unbelievable. I pick it up and flick through - sure 
enough, there are the poems that got Dora and 
Bert kicked out of university, and then I read a 
little more and learn that Dora was born not two 
minutes from here, in Wickham, near the harbour. 
How could this be - is it here as part of an 
intention to align second-hand book sales with 
topics covered in the Fringe, or is it just another 
stunning coincidence? I purchase it and hold it in 
my hands, considering how the book, now thirty 
years on, doesn’t look aged a single day since it was 
bound. The paper is crisp, the cover immaculate. A 
PDF of the same would hardly look more timeless. 


Wedding letter to Deirdre Moore from Dora, 
dated 18 December 1947. 


I would have liked to be one of the Good Aunties 
crying into her handkerchief at the wedding. 
Aunt Jan did at mine and I’m sure Mother did 
too. Kim was indignant and knocked my hat off 
by accident. It was one of those poke bonnet 
affairs temporarily brought into fashion in an 
ankle-length Early Victorian revival. I had a 
2/6 nosegay with a paper doily at the back of 
Glebe florist and a cream sandwich with 
caramel icing from the Civil Service. 


I ride to 2 Annie Street, Wickham, the birthplace 
of Dora, and look the terrace up and down. The 
white picket fence I see in a photograph Deirdre 
took for the book has since been taken down, and 
in its place stands a tall, private hedge. The timber 
railings have been replaced with decorative 
wrought iron. It looks good; the place has been 
well-maintained and, for what it’s worth, has kept 
its original design mostly intact. 


The owner comes out while I’m there, a man only 
slightly older than me. He asks if he can help me. I 
ask him if he knows that this is the birthplace of 
Dora Toll, later Birtles. We’re just staying here, 
house sitting for a friend, he tells me. Who was 
Dora? 


Who was Bert? Who was Penny? Who was Avis? 
Who was I, from the vantage of the future, when 
enough time has passed to give all of this 
todayness the meaning it requires - I want to say, 
join me for a drink at the Jolly Roger, it was 
demolished thirteen years ago, we can climb the 
tree in the middle of the bar, there’s something up 
there, on the second floor, that AI can’t replicate 
yet, because it hasn’t yet been born. 


Everyone I love is alive right now. I won’t be able to 
say that forever. Recently, I rode my bike away 
from the city (sacrilege) towards the suburbs to 
access one of the two major shopping centres in 
the region. On the way there, I turned onto the 
footpath and saw what can only be described as 
profoundly mundane: a hedge in someone’s front 
yard (not dissimilar to the one in Dora Birtles’ old 
front yard), fencing off the home from the street, 
covered in pink camellias. 


I stopped my bike and looked at the contrast in 
colour between leaf and flower, the different states 
of unfolding each pleat of petal contained, and the 
anachronistic feeling it gave me of time passed, of 


the 1980s, a certain sense of fadedness, of Kodak 
photographs in an album, which is what must have 
been the Proustian catalyst to the sudden twin 
sense of gratitude and melancholy that rose within 
me: the sense that everyone I love is alive right 
now but won’t be forever. 


My mother and father are both alive and well, as 
are my wife and two children. This is my 
immediate family unit, and where my love most 
purposefully dwells. And, critically, I tell myself 
that it is because they are all alive and well that I 
can sit here, on my bike seat, during the stasis of 
an unencumbered mid-morning, and enjoy 
flowers so easily: my mind is at peace, I can access 
my family, we can share this world together in 
real-time, our memories and observations, for the 
brief period we're all here together. 


The flowers contain flowers 
in their bulbs, the skylights 
that turn on automatically 

in the morning, but then you 
can switch them on again to 
a higher position, a brighter 
sunbeam, a more intense and 
vibrant colour spectrum, the 
wallpaper that makes the real 
thing look like nature’s yawn. 


If I could give my children, my wife or my parents 
anything at all, it would be the knowledge that I 
love them with such completeness that my highest 
aspiration is for them, too, to sit in front of a 
camellia bush and do nothing except enjoy the 
colours, the states of unfolding, and the knowledge 
that I have likewise experienced this moment, in 
my own time. What’s that line, from Jacques Lacan 
- love is giving what you don’t have to someone 
who doesn’t want it. In my case, I want to give an 
impossible thing - a gap - to those with their own 
unfillable spaces. 


I sometimes fantasise about what it would feel like 
to be the only person alive in the world, fuelled in 
no small part by my reading of ‘Wittgenstein’s 
Mistress’ by David Markson (I think of the 
protagonist, alone, throwing tennis balls down the 
Spanish steps into an empty plaza, camping out in 
the Met, living on the beach). Years ago, I tinkered 
with the idea of writing a series of Empty World 
Meditations, a guided relaxation podcast that 
would bring the listener into an idyllic state of 
isolation. 


The reason I mention this, about feeling alone in 
the world, is that I sometimes wonder if it can 
dovetail with the knowledge that everybody I love 
is alive right now. Damien Hirst once discussed 
naming an artwork ‘I want to live forever, for a while’, 


which he said is essentially what it feels like to be 
alive. I wonder what my equivalent would be - ‘I 
want to be alone in the world, while all the people I love 
are alive and well’. 


Empty World Meditation #3. 


You walk down the middle of a two-lane 
freeway. The sun is high and warm and there is 
silence in every direction, all but your light 
footfalls on the road that tread now down an 
access lane towards a township by the sea. 
There is a community centre there, a fruit shop, 
a school, a medical practice, a bakery, a cinema. 
You push through the unlocked access door on 
the side of the cinema and find yourself in a 
dark hallway, treading burgundy carpet. In 
front of you are two cinema options, Cinema 1 
and Cinema 2. You make a choice of one of the 
two and walk inside, past the rows of empty 
seats, all the way up to the screen, which you 
stand in front of and look up at, feeling small. 


After stopping by the camellia hedge, I began to 
draft a poem: I am on a mid-morning ride to the 
shops when I stop to admire these flowers in a 
yard and feel a distinct sense that this moment in 
my life is a sweet spot regarding the aliveness of 
my family. Then, I ride to the shopping centre, a 
major commercial hub that, when I was a young 


lad, was much smaller than it is today. I go to the 
back of the centre, near where the entrance used to 
be. There is an unused car park shelter there, too far 
for most folks to park and walk around to the front, 
and a small park with wooden tables and chairs. I 
remember, as I pull my bike up, that my mother and 
I would sometimes sit and eat a sausage roll there, 
thirty-five years ago. 


This concludes the poem - the spontaneous memory 
of a lovely moment with my mother in the shadow 
of this hulking, brutalist concrete shopping centre 
grown massive in the intervening years, after 
having paused minutes earlier beside a camellia 
hedge and expressed gratitude for the past, for the 
present, and for holding the future at bay for as 
long as possible. I mentioned Proust - in Samuel 
Beckett’s study of Proust, he says, ‘The creation of the 
world did not take place once and for all time, but takes 
place every day.’ 1 wonder if the opposite is also true, 
on the uncreation of the world. 


Recently, I have been delivering what I call my 
Backyard Lectures. I have been invited to stand in a 
half dozen yards in Newcastle (next to white 
painted concrete bird baths, between garden beds, 
with lattice backdrops, on terraced landings) and 
give talks on anything that seems pertinent to the 
present day. They started after someone raised the 
idea on a local forum as an alternative to hosting a 


band for a backyard dinner party. I contacted the 
poster, and we made it happen. From there, word 
travelled, and I gave talks to others, audiences of ten 
to twenty people, during balmy Summer evenings 
around the city. 


I tested out some of the ideas I’ve been discussing 
here, words written during the day after ocean 
submersions, delivering them as the sun went low, 
feeling out their resonance with those who stood 
and sat around. Some of the talks yielded patient 
receptivity while others broke out in arguments, like 
one afternoon, on the topic of Australian outback 
hyperreality, which tumbled into a fist fight and, 
after the aggressor was dragged off and thrown into 
a pool by the host, his head only narrowly missing 
the chlorine glossed steps, resulted in an invitation 
to balm my bruises by joining the now disrobed host 
and his wife in their rooftop spa on one of the city’s 
highest points (I declined). 


Why isn’t music better than it is? 
Sometimes I'll be speed walking 

down a busy street, late for an 
appointment, and what I'll do is 

I'll throw my car keys over a fence 

or down an inaccessible drain 

just to make things really hard 

and show what I’m really made of. 
That’s why music isn’t better than it is. 


For some of the talks, I substituted in more poetic 
versions of the essays. Some of these worked well 
enough, and my confidence grew. As Summer 
likewise elevated, I took an increasing number of 
bike rides and ocean dips, which rapidly gave rise 
to the idea of four connected poems - Bodies, 
Decades, Flowers, Nights. In time, they all failed to 
actualise. They collapsed after being asked to wear 
too much reality. 


In the first poem, which I titled ‘Bodies’, I 
attempted to describe the aforementioned 
conversation with my daughter, riding on the back 
of my e-bike, about the progressive abstraction of 
the physical body in an age of non-objects and 
mounting virtualisation of the self. In the next 
part of the poem, I intended to counterpoint this 
notion via the night ride with my wife after drinks 
with friends, during which the presence of the 
body returns in a viscerally offline capacity. 


The second poem had the working title ‘Decades’, 
which tried to capture the creative dialectic 
between my day walking around Newcastle 
thirteen years ago, when I first gained a sense of 
what could fuel my narrative voice, compared with 
the ride into town the other week, when the city 
didn’t speak to me this way. My voice would have 
to be established not in the crumbling remains of 
abandoned taverns but rather in whatever was still 


to be found within the city of myself, crumbling or 
otherwise. 


All these draft poems, including the fourth, which 
Tl discuss shortly, buckled under the weight of 
information I was trying to saddle them with. 
When a journalist asked a Russian ballet dancer, at 
the turn of the last century, what her dance meant, 
what it was trying to communicate, she said that if 
she could have expressed it in so many words, then 
the dance wouldn’t have been necessary. ‘A poem 
should not mean // But be’ said Archibald Macleish in 
‘Ars Poetica’. There are times, though, for me at 
least, where this doesn’t feel possible, and it’s best 
to just say it straight. 


I don’t just get this way about poetry - I am a 
student of David Shields ‘Reality Hunger when he 
says (I’m paraphrasing) that he wants novels to be 
rid of all the decorative trimmings of character, of 
plot, of describing weather patterns and where 
people are standing in rooms, their dialogue, and 
just cut to what the novelist is actually wanting to 
say: tell us what you know, the really important 
stuff. Explain what you want to pass on to the 
other humans, and don’t worry about the rest. The 
rest is noise. 


But, do it artistically - don’t just write a dry thesis 
explicating your worldview. Rather, choreograph 


the dance. Be both artist and critic: paint the 
canvas an impasto white, hang it on a wall, unpack 
its meaning, but do it in reverse. When words can 
do that - to not mean, but be; but, also, yes, to 
mean something, just enough: then we’re dancing. 


This current failed poem, about the pink camellias 
and the sausage roll with mum, I titled ‘Flowers’. I'll 
tell you this, before we get there - the next poem 
that didn’t work, the one I finish this essay with, 
had the working title ‘Nights’. Bodies, Decades, 
Flowers, Nights. All incomplete, now exploded into 
twenty thousand words of Summer prose in the 
unlimited present of the city and its waters, alone 
in my mind as everyone I love lives forever both 
without and within. 


Empty World Meditation #9. 


You walk down the hill that overlooks the city 
towards the base of the multistorey carpark. 
Then, you walk from the bottom of the carpark 
to its apogee, up the rampways. Each level looks 
over another set of homes on the lowside. All the 
rooms are empty, the yards are still. One of the 
yards has a blue chair in it that you consider 
sitting in later. The top of the carpark carries a 
pedestrian bridge that leads into a department 
store. You walk into the whitegoods section 
where refrigerators and dishwashers sit in 


darkness, stainless steel monuments to a 
civilisation only just concluded. In the room 
next door the manchester and bedding beckons 
you to sleep until sundown, when the stars 
begin to blink on and on. 


After riding on from the camellia hedge, towards 
the shopping centre Leviathan, which has changed 
direction since my boyhood, I wonder whether it’s 
actually true that this is a sweet spot in my life that 
uniquely allows for the slow-motion appreciation 
of flowers. It’s true that my immediate family is 
alive, but it goes without saying that this in itself 
does not provide a basis for peace. 


At the risk of bringing in another flower here, life 
is not a bed of roses. Familial health, the trials and 
tribulations of every given day, traumas of the 
past, fears of the future - this is life, it is not peace. 
At best, if suitably dealt with, it can result in amor 
fati: a welcoming and embracing of fate, of all that 
it delivers, beyond good and evil. 


This points to the more Nietzschean truth at the 
heart of my moment with the flowers: it is not 
within a hermitude of idyllic ease, within reach of 
still-breathing family, that I enjoy an adagio of the 
mind; nor is it reliant on a sustained curation of 
imaginary peace - no, it is because of the challenge 
to life and its order and continuity that one must 


develop a love of fate, to stand up to its weather 
conditions and say Yes into the heart of the world. 


It is this stance that provides fertile conditions not 
only for the growth of flowers (for the entire history 
of destruction that culminates in the soil, the blood 
and bone, fueling those first emergent green shoots) 
but for a mundane appreciation of their colours on a 
languid ride through suburban backroads. Peace is 
not a lull between complications - it is knowing that 
it can embrace all possible complications to furnish 
its home. 


We went to the circus together 

and they showed us to the VIP tent 
before the show and then wait staff 
gave us each a spoon with a dollop 

of ice cream on the bowl of the spoon 
and the ice cream tasted so good and 
then one of us looked at the other 
with a tipped expression and then did 
the thing we were both now aware of 
and bit down on the chocolate spoons 
we were both holding and went oh my. 


This past weekend, my son and I made a video game 
using an Atari 2600 emulation tool. We wanted to 
make a game where you ride a bike around 
Newcastle. The Bogey Hole was our first stage, a 
simple path that necklaces the water. Then, we 


added Nobbys lighthouse, directing the bike to 
jump over the concrete blocks that provide armour 
to the breakwall. King Edward Park came next, 
gliding down the steep grassy slopes. The fourth 
stage we built was Hunter Street Mall in its state 
of deconstruction, with bricks falling from the sky 
that the bike needs to dodge. Next, my favourite 
peak in the city, Bolton Street Carpark, where a 
rogue magpie dips in a sinewave as it crosses the 
screen. Finally, the most challenging stage of all - 
the carpark of King Street McDonald's, where a 
shopping trolley bounces around the arena like a 
DVD logo on a TV screen, threatening to knock the 
bike back into its Bogey Hole origins. 


In my early teens, when computer game graphics 
just kept getting better and better, it was easy to 
fantasise about what the endpoint would be: a 
game that visually mirrored the real world. I could 
see it in my head, a game where you did fantastical 
things in a world that looked indistinguishable 
from outside the screen. The pixels that turned 
into blocky polygons would be smoothed out with 
each new graphics card, like Rodin and his 
assistants taking a block of marble and rendering 
it into a mimicry of life that makes the organic 
human body look falsified in comparison. 


However, as it went, the portability of games 
prevailed, and user experience triumphed over 


visuals. The ability to play a game on a mobile 
device was a bigger market driver than folks 
sitting in front of powerhouse computer 
workstations and consoles. Minecraft made the 
leap from desktop computer to iPod Touch and 
graphics never really mattered again - retro, 
classic, big blocks, big pixels: this was preferable, it 
allowed for infinite landscape generation and a 
level of sandbox creativity that was the new 
standard for gaming. Terraria, Roblox, Stardew 
Valley, on and on. Having grown up on Atari 2600 
graphics, the nostalgia was palpable, as all 
foreverist End of History time-loops are, when the 
future keeps turning to the past. 


I think about the bike game my son and I have 
made - Ridin’ Newcastle - and daydream about 
another, similar game that I could make where, 
instead of riding a bike around Newcastle, I could 
wander through the memories of my past in a 4-bit 
topography. Atari versions of my life within cubist 
parameters. I’ve always been interested in games 
where you did nothing much - no action, no 
violence, no competition. I read an article about 
the history of handholding in games the other 
week. What a beautiful idea: play dynamics that 
allowed characters to grasp one another by the 
hand, in companionship and love, and drag each 
other across the screen. I like that. 


Empty World Meditation #27. 


You walk into an industrial economic zone that 
was originally constructed for a Summer 
Olympic bid that didn’t eventuate due to 
miscommunication. There are twenty hotels 
within a four block radius, a swimming pool 
never filled, a video game arcade with titles of 
games that are not quite the real thing. On the 
roof of one of the hotels, you survey the land, as 
you always do after you’ve made your way to 
the highest point. You can see motorways and 
mountains, desert plains and, far in the 
opposite direction, a caravan park beside the 
sea. If you piled these twenty hotels on top of 
each other, hung onto the railing on the roof of 
the top-most hotel, and allowed this stack of 
buildings to bend like a fishing rod, rubber 
geometry, towards the desert, and then let them 
to spring back up to a straight posture and you 
suddenly let go of the railing - you'd fly into the 
caravan park and start life again with a new 
name and a different technique for dreaming. 


Perhaps I could make a game out of stopping on 
the footpath by the mundane hedge with the pink 
camellias while the character thinks about those 
they love. I can see it now - pink squares on a green 
rectangle, a grey strip for the concrete path, white 
and brown tessellations for the house behind the 


hedge, four different gradients of blue for the sky. 
And the character, monochrome or near enough, 
pillbox helmet on a pillbox head, standing front 
on, looking at the flowers while memories blink in 
slowly, bit by bit, every horizontal line drawn and 
redrawn constantly due to the lack of onboard 
graphics memory in my consciousness, to diffuse 
the world and replace the scene. 


My wife would be there, yellow dress on, dangling 
her legs over the boundaries of sunset on the wall 
behind the restaurant that never opens; my 
daughter, playing with plastic barnyard animals in 
our yard, wearing a bunny suit and pushing a bowl 
of dry ice on a swing in slow motion; my son, 
walking the gas pipelines that breach one edgeland 
for another, behind the university, downriver, 
night vision goggles on; fishing with my dad by the 
cooperative on the harbour, yellowfish and roughy, 
treading the alley behind the first home built in 
Newcastle that was invisible to he and his 
schoolmates across the road because they didn’t 
know it could be seen; that sausage roll with my 
mum at the little wooden table and chairs, all the 
brief hours of childhood and youth, the blue plastic 
hobby horse in the photographed park where my 
smile was first documented. 


Of course, there would be my dog, Jonsi, too. The 
service he provides, as many dogs do: an invitation 


to walk for the sake of it. Under subtle 
provocation, in this pixelated landscape, the 
character would guide the joystick in one 
direction, and Jonsi would take things a literal step 
further, granting the player permission to walk 
into places that you procedurally shouldn't be able 
to. You would walk through walls, holes torn 
through the security fences of industrial estates, 
into commercial buildings with doors left ajar, 
impossible that the designer of the video game 
would have even thought, even had the capacity, to 
build out the interior of a space that should have 
remained inaccessible to the player. 


But Jonsi would take you there, into the 
ontologically incomplete, onto rail corridors, 
private property of every stripe throughout the 
city. Your blocky brown Finnish-Lapphund would 
be your psychogeographic ticket to unfettered 
urban exploration, because your player is just 
following along - sorry, security guard, he must 
have picked up a scent and got carried away, I 
think he was chasing a rabbit. We didn’t even 
realise you could go out of bounds. Then, once on 
the other side, you would push a button and give 
Jonsi an extra treat for being such a good boy. 


My dear friend A would also be in the game - 
listening to Orbital on evening drives around the 
neighbourhood in the last splintered embers of the 


1990s, recreating the true history of nihilism in 
Western Philosophy against the backdrop of all- 
night service stations like some imagined but 
unpainted Edward Hopper scene, early morning 
climbs up rocky hills that overlook cities and lakes 
we can no longer place, blinking off the map 
somewhere, post-geography. 


Perhaps my other friends would be there too, the 
formative ones from my teenage years. At certain 
times - after reflecting on married life and twenty 
years in the workforce - I host imaginary 
conversations with these friends in my mind. I 
make jokes about how we've actually reached this 
point in our lives, considering how we were as 
teens, the miracle of it all, the long mid-morning 
of our growing up. They laugh, they offer their own 
hard-earned wisdom, hair depleted, soft middles. 
But it’s all fiction because other than A, I don’t see 
those friends anymore. I’ve tried, but the emails 
and messages remain unanswered, relegated to 
the void. 


I could have these conversations with colleagues, 
new friends, acquaintances, but there wouldn’t be 
any point to it. Not really. The only reason to talk 
about these things at all would be to contrast them 
against the teenage world that defined everything 
that followed. Those few years when we 
crystallised our aesthetics and our ideologies, 


when we realised how vital close friendships were 
to our capacity to define ourselves against the 
bounds of another just like us. Maybe my own 
proclivity for isolation has rendered me separate, 
or maybe we all share the same temperament - the 
same thing that brought us together, tuned to the 
same remote frequency, is what has brought the 
seasons to pass for each of us alone in our own 
private distance. 


This would also need to be included in the game. It 
all would be. The only problem is that I wouldn’t be 
able to find a suitable spot to bring it all to a close. 
There would be too much to include - this would be 
the point, of course. If there wasn’t too much to 
include, too much to say, there wouldn’t be any 
reason to even start. The abundance is the reason, 
the meaning. It is the maximalism of it all that 
gives memory the clearance to levitate when 
something all too simple and bright comes into 
view - a footpath, a house where everybody who 
has ever lived is currently waiting for the bell to 
ring, behind the hedge with the flowers that never 
close, always half open, ready to remind you that 
you aren’t, and can never be, truly alone. 


This morning, I was walking through the park 
with my dog when we heard a loud crack followed 
by a tremendous thud. The branch of a Moreton 
Bay fig, some fifteen metres long, had fallen from 
its trunk and collapsed in a remarkably safe 
position, only partially crushing an old fence that 
had been bent by similar former acts of gravity. 
Within the gap rendered by the break, at the 
juncture between trunk and branch, a mouth of 
splinters showed, with salmon pink juts and 
burnished yellow triangles overlapping one 
another as thick white streams of sap dripped 
down to the root system beneath a bed of leaves. 


I stopped to photograph the scene, having done 
the same over the years as other beautiful versions 
of the same variety of tree dotted around the park 
have succumbed to the same interplay of seasonal 
harm (too much water followed by too much 
dearth) and the cruel irony of the tree outgrowing 
its ability to keep growing. A man twenty years my 
junior walked up to me and released an emphatic 
woah. Look at that, he said. It’s so beautiful. Why did it 
have to fall like this. He reached towards the tree and 
I looked at his naked back (he was shirtless, having 
just been to the beach) and saw, no joke, the tattoo 
of an immense tree that for all the world could 
have been a Moreton Bay fig. If only his tattoo 
showed the inked tree with a fallen branch, too, it 
could have been some flora-based retelling of ‘The 
Portrait of Dorian Gray’. 


Summer has been turned up to full strength this 
week, so much that my son told me earlier, while 
swimming in the canoe pool beside the ocean 
baths, that it felt like Newcastle had two suns 
above it. Maybe it does, but tonight they are 
elsewhere. An angel with neon wings, a halo of 
audio-synchronised lights, and a ballerina dress 
with a sparkle swarm of fireflies at the hem, skirts 
the waterside harbour where I sit and write these 
words. A cruise ship sits opposite the coal 
terminal; a party boat with a rainbow colour cycle 
of LEDs passes by as its revellers cast their voices 


across the flat waters. I have a notepad and a copy 
of ‘Cat’s Cradle’ by Kurt Vonnegut Jr, and if it 
wasn't a Saturday night and so close to Christmas, 
I'd have found somewhere much quieter to sit. But 
this is fine. It’s nice to witness the punctuation of 
the year as it unfurls. 


The dark transitions in 

like rain made from black: 
it starts in the sky and falls 
in vertical lines until gutters 
fill with universals of dusk, 
a nativity of post-light. 

I perch like a closed smile 
behind the water, in front 
of the city, on a ledge that 
overlooks Australia, time 
and its associates, primed 
in its overcoats of meaning. 
The pages I read from are 
blank until the light bulb, 
hanging from a skyhook, 
transitions in a fall of text 
in vertical lines, typecast, 
until shadows fill in the rest. 


This has been a pattern, recently. Once my family 
is asleep, I get on my bike and ride into the city. 
Down the hill past the tavern with its doors closed, 
staff wiping down tables; past the quiet bus 


terminal, gates closed for the night; across the two 
main roads that contain no traffic now, onto the 
harbour where small blue lights illuminate the foot 
bridges, coal ships bathed in a starfield of 
spotlights; then onto wherever I can sit with 
enough illumination to read. 


Tonight it is in the little park with public BBQs 
near the water, but other nights I have sat on the 
hill near the old stone fortifications that overlook 
King Edward Park, or behind the cinema on a seat 
beneath a radio tower, or in the empty food court 
above the arcade scheduled to be demolished (both 
the food court and the arcade, and everything 
between), or in the rotunda in the park, or any of 
the walls by any of the beaches, the steps of the 
library. Wherever an incandescent bulb allows for 
size ten font in a paperback to be read with ease, I 
park my bike and set up for an hour of quiet, 
uninterrupted, nocturnal literature. 


My recent selection of books has included 
Vonnegut’s aforementioned masterpiece, some 
autobiographical essays by Hesse (including those 
before and after both World War I and World War 
II, and a recent reread of ‘Siddhartha’ and 
‘Rosshalde’), a collection of Sebald’s early writing on 
other European authors, a collection of Walter 
Benjamin’s iterative essays that developed into his 
composition of The Storyteller, the poetry of 


Edward Thomas, ‘In The Second Year by Storm 
Jameson, ‘The Return of the Soldier’ by Rebecca West. 
These selections reflect where my midnight mind 
has been furrowing lately, across weeks of heat 
building on heat, two suns above the city. For 
reasons that may seem obvious or strange (this is 
partially what got me into the fist fight in that 
Backyard Lecture), I have been thinking about war. 


The obvious reasons are exactly that - daily 
headlines speak to the ongoing war between 
Ukraine and Russia, the Sudanese civil war, Israel 
and Palestine. Beyond the headlines, there are 
videos and reports from other quarters, but 
beneath this, in the subtext of podcast banter and 
political asides at rallies and demonstrations, an 
increasingly prominent narrative has emerged 
about the potential for new, active wars between 
nations currently only frustrated with one 
another. Not because of the usual outcomes, of the 
redrawing of maps or the procurement of 
resources or the eradication of a people, but for the 
existential moral benefit of the invading nation. 


We need a war to give our young men a purpose, and to 
give our young women a supply of men who have 
purpose. This is the sentiment: because we have 
strayed too far from the epicentre of historical 
holocaust, we have lost a feeling for moral 
absolutes and an associated sense of why we're 


alive. And, it'll serve a practical economic purpose 
as well. If technology will do the work of the future, 
then the ninety-nine percent of humans in the 
cities and the suburbs, those not tending to the 
data farms of cyberpastoralism, will either have to 
choose between an aimless future of drug 
addiction or, instead, a return to the golden era of 
warfare. This is the dialogue. 


Graffiti on Hunter Street and King Street: 


The old world is dying and the new world 
struggles to be born (spoken by a three-eyed 
version of Blinky Bill, with a mechanical leg and 
a bindle over his shoulder). 


How do you get out? (beside an ink dripped 
cartoon head of a greaser on one side and a 
kneeling naked female torso on the other). 


We are all puppets in this game called life 
(spoken by a rabbit on a paddle pop stick). 


Reading across these Summer nights, the apparent 
trajectory falls into place. When Nietzsche declared 
the Death of God, it took the foxholes of World War 
I to bring faith back into Europe. Good and evil 
took clear sides, but then, after the wars, morality 
drifted. Nihilism set in, Dadaism - war didn’t 
provide a bed of moral certainty, it just further 


widened the void at the centre of the human dream. 
But there were pockets of post-war puritanism: in 
that book I picked up after catching up with Penny 
and Avis, on Dora and Bert Birtles, there is a quote 
from Dora in which she says how prudish the 
University authorities were after the war, leading to 
the expulsion of her and Bert after the publication 
of their love poetry. Dora and Bert were redefining 
what a post-morality affirmation of humanity could 
look like (Nietzsche’s twist on Shakespeare, That 
which is done out of love always occurs beyond good and 
evil), but the centres of political power, the ones 
that waved the flags of war, said we haven’t got the 
luxury for that now. 


The holocaust brought it all back with clear 
delineations of good and evil, and the nostalgic 
romance of this dialectic seems to have been 
culturally intoxicating. Just read any of the 
adventure paperbacks from this period, or the 
cinema that followed - heck, go straight into 
Salinger and Pynchon: the rain and the choir and 
the tearoom where the narrator talks with Esmé 
and her brother; and then, Jessica and Roger 
during a night drive coming across a church in the 
snow - again, it’s wet and cold - with another choir, 
“this is the War's evensong, the War's canonical hour, 
and the night is real” followed, in time, by the 
following declaration, on Jessica and Roger’s 
wartime relationship: “They are in love. Fuck the war’. 


Not so, as their relationship dissipates once the 
glow of war depletes. In a coarse turn of the line by 
Pynchon, we might say they fuck because they are in 
love with the war. Something about death being 
right around the corner, clear roles and 
responsibilities, being not necessarily on the right 
side of history (although that is a plus, for those 
who can house such simplification) but of history, 
of any history, just being involved in a bracket of 
time that feels like it will mean something later. 
The future will define the present only if we deliver 
it something worthy of reflection. 


When the sun leans back, low 
enough so all that remains 

turns to silhouette, flat black 
against embers, I imagine the 
opposite when the sun returns, 
all standing monuments now 
white without perspective, no 
colour or gradient - without sun, 
no light; with sun, all the light; 

a monochromatic world, but for 
sound too - the train whistle is 
present, but when it fades away 
a hollow in the air stays, inverted. 
For people, too, yes? All at once. 


This is the present narrative that churns me up as I 
sit in the dark and read on these hot Summer 


nights in these Murmuring ‘20s. Because here’s my 
moral truth - I want to remain outside of history. 
We cannot borrow meaning from catastrophe. 
History is not a circle, nor is it a line forward - like 
all dichotomies, all antinomies, it must comprise an 
unresolved negation of both. Sure, the human 
hardware we meet the world with is the same that 
Aristotle used to welcome the morning, but if we 
were to meet Aristotle today, he would not 
understand us, nor we him. Time has changed us 
all, but the gap between the changes remains the 
same as it ever was. 


When Thales of Miletus proposed that water is the 
originating principle of all things, Aristotle liked the 
idea but developed it further towards a concept of 
multiplicity, of a continuity beneath change, the 
flow between earth, air, fire and water. I get it, and 
you've got to hand it to Aristotle, but I still get stuck 
with the flux, the divisibility of it all, which is only 
important if we want to bring all of this back to 
truth and meaning: in the period of time in which 
we live, it feels like one of increasing fragmentation. 
Language and identity, neurodivergence and 
gender and sexuality, the line between human and 
not, between flesh and not, the online world in 
which the economically powerless - without land 
ownership, without capital - find ways to further 
hold the feet of power to the linguistic flames by 
imagining new ways to divide and be seen. 


What is the endpoint of fragmentation, when the 
pieces are divided over and over again, halved and 
halved again? I side with Thales of Miletus here, as 
the night beckons me for one more swim. 
Everything becomes water. You break the stone up 
into so many atomised pieces, you get water. The 
walls of the Bogey Hole, carved out of coastal shelf, 
are slowly becoming water. The beach, the walls of 
sandstone and shale, are all being ground into fine 
pieces of matter that are water at heart. 


I have frequently written about how we seek out 
external environments that mirror the landscapes 
of our internal subjectivity - the mountains, the 
flat expansive plains, the topology of an urban 
maze. If the external world is a mirror of our 
internal empire, which we seek to resolve and feel 
complete, then time and human history are surely 
a mirror to the technology of water. 


Graffiti on Bolton Street and Watt Street: 


I wish that men would stop yelling at me in the 
street (painted on a laneway wall). 


I love my girlfriend (painted on a billiard table 
store, since demolished). 


I still miss you so much (painted on the back of 
a navigation sign). 


In ‘Siddhartha’, Hermann Hesse had his 
protagonist seek out meaning in all manner of 
human enterprise: as a religious man, before he 
realises that second-hand truths are worthless; as a 
wander ascetic, before he realises that he is living 
solely to negate life; as a hedonist, a lover of flesh, 
before he realises that it does not sustain him; as a 
rich merchant, before he realises that abundance 
is the same as negation; and, finally, an assistant 
ferryman, listening to the river and, eventually, 
hearing all of humanity resounding in its waters. 
But this is not the endpoint - it is only a finale in 
the narrative sense. Given enough time, Siddartha 
would move on from his role as a ferryman to yet 
another change, always without a stable truth that 
defines the measure of his life. 


Like the irony of ‘The Road Less Travelled’ by Robert 
Frost, it doesn’t matter which path you take: we 
will always pretend our chosen destination was 
inevitable. And, if that takes a concerted effort by 
populists to divert the trajectory of our time 
towards war, to seek out those old pre-fragmented 
moral truths, then, as Kurt Vonnegut said so often, 
so it goes. But it’s not where I want things to go. Not 
even a little bit. 


The wind is picking up and flapping the pages of 
my books, my pile on the table beside the harbour. 
I see a double-decker bike, literally a bike on top of 


a bike, travelling down the footpath in front of a 
chariot-style pedal vehicle, all of them covered in 
Christmas lights. The riders and passengers yell out 
season’s greetings, and I wave back and think of my 
family asleep at home while their dad / husband / son 
ruminates on fictions within fictions and whether any 
of it will become real. This was my fourth, failed poem - 
riding into the city, night after night, to sit alone and 
read. I get on my bike, unadorned with lights, and head 
home in the dark. 


Text messages to say hi while you're in the city. 

Then, interruptions from people walking up to you 

and then passages from the books you have read 

or written, and then the town, talking through its walls. 


The next morning, on what is predicted to be the 
hottest day of the year, I ride to the Bogey Hole for an 
early swim. It ended up storming last night, the third 
time this month that I've been caught out in the city on 
my bike in the rain. But other than an increased 
presence of ants on the park benches, there is little sign 
of that today, just the rising heat that will soon become 
overbearing. 


On my way down through King Edward Park, I am 
called out to by a man with a heavy backpack and a 
sensible hat. He speaks in a strong Spanish accent and 
says, the beach, is there? I say yes, and point to our left, 
the beach is down there, and there, I point to my right, 


is a rock pool for swimming in. From his warm 
countenance that balances anticipated confusion 
with care, I can tell that he only half registers my 
response. He reaches out his hand, your name, and 
I say, Craig. He tells me his but I immediately 
forget it, as is my nature. Then he says it is his first 
day here. I say that I'll hopefully see him around. 
We wave farewell as I glide down the hill. 


I’m halfway down when I regret not having offered 
him a lift on the back of my bike. The fact that I 
don’t have a helmet for him is what stopped me, 
although this seems ridiculously parental now. 
Plus, it’s a tricky ride down on the loose gravel, and 
I wouldn’t want to put him at risk. I park and dive 
into the water - there are already a half dozen 
others here, some forming a circle as they chat and 
laugh, a few long-limbed young women glowing 
gold in the sun - but I only finish a few laps before 
I think about going back for the traveller. It would 
be such a shame if he didn’t see this place, because 
for me it is the crown jewel of the city (perhaps 
literally, given its colonial birth), and the idea that 
someone visiting Newcastle wouldn’t make it to 
the Bogey Hole, after walking so close to its 
perimeter, is something I just can’t live with. 


I get back on my bike and find him thirty seconds 
later, sitting on a little bench facing the sea. With 
some difficulty, I try to tell him that I was worried 


I gave the wrong directions. He tries to interpret 
what I’ve said, but then just smiles and puts his 
arm on my shoulder. Look, he says. Dolphins. In his 
hand is a small remote control with a video screen 
built in, receiving feed from a drone that must be 
flying over the water as we speak. I can see a pod of 
dolphins, six or seven, children and parents, 
swimming together in the ocean. Turning, I cannot 
see the drone, but know it must be there, that he 
must have sat down and set things up and sent it 
out far beyond the coast. And to think I was 
worried that he wouldn’t find the Bogey Hole. He 
has so much cartography in his hand here that he 
could navigate all the way to New Zealand. 


Beautiful, 1 say as I watch the dolphins dip and 
stream through the screen. I take out my phone 
and speak into it, I say, translate this into Spanish - I 
am going to be swimming in a rock pool, down this 
pathway to the right. I might see you later on. My phone 
says - Voy a ira nadar a la piscina de rocas, bajando por 
este camino a la derecha. Tal vez nos veamos después. My 
new friend says, thank you, Craig, yes, yes. He places 
his hand on my shoulder, and I pat his arm in 
solidarity. Then I head back to the waters. 


Craig lives in Hamilton, New South Wales with his wife, 
daughter and son. He is a school teacher and is the author of 
the novel 'A Complicated Surgery Will Take Place On The 
Beach Tonight’ (2020), the filmed essay 'Beyond Correct and 
Incorrect Nature’ (2021), the novella ‘Antinomicity' (2022), the 
collection of short works 'Postseasonal’ (2023) and selected 
works ‘Pastoral Scanlines' (2025). His poem ‘Autoincorrect' 
(2023) was shortlisted for the Newcastle Poetry Prize, and an 
academic work 'A Spectrum of Real’ was published by 
Routledge in 'Gaming Disability’ (2022). 


He also records music under the name Wrenasmir, releasing 
LP albums Disjecta Songjiang '11 - '15 (2016), Oct Mod Var 
(2020), Aubadion (2021), Partimentodays (2021) and 
Telegraph (2023). Selected tracks have also appeared on 
compilation albums for the German record label ‘Bathurst’. 


TIME: 00:07:35 Loc: BOGEY HOLE 


You can play Ridin' Newcastle, the video game my son 
and I created in homage to the Atari 2600, at this link: 


www.wrenasmir.com/ridinnewcastle 


Best played on a computer. See if you can beat it 
under 40 seconds, that's the current world record. 


Abrachas Publishing 


