Fellow Disjecta, Oh 
Sunny Danger Time 


Craig Warren Smith 


Copyright © Craig Warren Smith 


All rights reserved 


The moral rights of the author have, toa 
cursory extent, been somewhat asserted. 


Cover illustrations by Teresa Smith. 


www.wrenasmir.com 


2024 


Abrachas Publishing 


‘vy Wie Sey a 
\#\|/# 


[~\c + § ee 


\r| as 
ant) 
ay 


|g h 
ea 
»i$@&) >\ 


o1 - Fellow Disjecta, Oh Sunny Danger Time 
55 - Sovereignty is an Artificial Soul 


85 -  TheGlass House 


Fellow Disjecta, Oh 
Sunny Danger Time 


|/ (o)]o) (0) \| 
ec | 


I had been waxing lyrical on nineties nostalgia for 
what seemed like months to anyone who would 
care to listen when the Fabio goose incident came 
up across the dinner table. We laughed about it - 
about the idea of Fabio, about getting hit in the 
nose by a goose, the whole millennium closing 
kitsch of it all - and thought nothing more of it 
until the next day when I went for a bike ride. 
Without a word of a lie, I got hit in the nose by a 
sparrow as I was careening down a hill. It flew 
from left to right across my vision and drew blood 
from the bridge. 


My son is four and has recently taken to playing a 
software emulation of a Japanese arcade game 
from the early nineties. Mega Man, or Rock Man 
in the original translation, is a robotic boy created 
by a kindly father figure in a science laboratory, 
similar in every way to Astro Boy who was, we 
assume, a nuclear-age update on Pinocchio. I 
watch the crystalline star-field backgrounds 
lacquered with parallax velveteen scanlines of 
indeterminately coloured pixel biomes and see a 
beautiful and necessary offset to the decimating 
cannon blasts from my son’s right arm. 


From my wing-chair here, facing four broad 
window panes in the sunken bar lounge of The 
Grand Hotel, looking out to the beach at a storm 
passing through, I spot a rainbow. It is positioned 
right where domestic flights begin their descent 
into the local airfield, so much that it looks like 
they are flying through a luminous archway. My 
wife was recently told she has rainbow cataracts. 
She sees chromatic haloes around all sources of 
light. ’'m colourblind, so I feel this somewhat 
balances us out. 


I remember going to a beach one Summer’s 
morning two decades ago when I was seventeen 
or eighteen with two girls in my high school 
advanced history class who invited me for a swim. 
It felt so uncanny - here I was, an awkward 
outsider riding the waves beside eight long limbs 
and two ponytails shaking free beneath infinite 
salt laden skies. At one stage a green turtle passed 
us by and it looked large enough for us to all climb 
aboard. For reasons unknown, out of the three of 
us I am the only one to have made it alive to forty. 


During my university days I joined an arts 
collective. I must have been walking through Civic 
Park one evening when I saw a light on upstairs in 
TPI House and, like a moth, went over to 
investigate. One week later a slam poet read aloud 
one of my early pieces of journalism while a bass 
player accompanied. I was invited to participate 
in improvised circus shows the group put on and 
was asked to soundtrack an art performance of a 
romantic couple who lived in a plastic terrarium 
in the Watt Space art gallery for a month. 


When my daughter, now fourteen (this is the year 
of fours - my son is four, my daughter fourteen, 
my wife and I forty) was four, she used to call 
rainbows 'rain boats'. | read The Rainbow by D H 
Lawrence for the first time earlier this year and 
became interested in the ninety-nine days he 
spent in Australia during which he wrote his novel 
Kangaroo. Living in Australia can feel like being 
in pages of a global newspaper that have been cut 
due to lack of international interest. You can, ona 
pleasant day, feel well outside of history. 


I recently finished an assignment for ABC 
National Radio on the decline of service stations 
in rural areas. The piece was sparked by an 
interview that William T. Vollmann did on the 
same program in relation to his recently 
published second volume of Carbon Ideologies. 
Some country towns are in a difficult spot due to 
their reliance on petrol for farm work and also 
simply traveling for basic services, whilst facing 
economic conditions, due to population decline 
and all the rest, that mean many fuel stations are 
simply unavailable. 


The Hopperesque has become the fetishisation of 
economic decline and subsequent dreams of 
peace. In Edward Hopper’s Gas, his vision is that 
of a lonely old soul toiling in obscurity. Today, the 
aesthetic of abandonment is an erotic one, of 
young people discovering eden on earth the day 
after modernism collapses. To see a desolate 
service station is to see a vision of the eternal 
freedom promised after death. Critically, not your 
death - this is a vision of capital taking the living 
world with it, except for you. In an inversion of 
the Christ tale, the world died so you could live. 


Turning forty reminded me of the age I was as a 
child when my father turned forty and I thought, 
forty, my dad is old now. For my entire youth my 
parents had ages that started with three, and now 
my father had stepped into a new bracket. Now 
my father is about to turn seventy and I think, 
seventy, that feels properly old. We share a 
cultural catalogue, my father and I, when we catch 
up to walk together, of references to Les Murray 
talking to Bob Ellis, of Heifetz and his violin and 
battery run car, of Ruskin on Turner, of Groucho 
Marx and Terry Thomas and M*A*S*H. 


My mother and I took my son to the beach the 
other month. He had recently taken ill but was 
feeling up to a trip to the rock pools. The two of 
them stood in a crater that rhythmically filled 
with foam wash from the incoming waves. 
Hearing his glittering laughter and seeing her 
beam with elation at every jump and dip he took 
as water filled their declivity was my amor fati. 
Responses to our condition of nihilism should not 
be leaden and graven - Chesterton was wrong, 
Nietzsche delivered perfectly on the value of soap 
bubbles and butterflies, of guffaw as battle cry. 


Earlier this year I attended an alumni media event 
at the university. I got chatting to a younger chap 
about a business he had recently started, 
developing and selling quote unquote smart 
refrigerator thermometers that were able to 
remotely monitor and adjust microdegrees of cool 
for food or medicine for restaurants and 
pharmacies. He didn't know what to say when I 
showed him a photo I had taken a week prior at a 
rubbish dump of old medical refrigeration units 
with attached forked probes that I presumed were 
antiquated versions of what he was talking about. 


After a significant storm that blew nearly all the 
most established trees in the region onto their 
sides, dirt plate of shallow root systems held flat 
against the horizon like a shield or a modesty 
curtain protecting the dignity of the fallen wood, 
my wife and I, for reasons unknown, broke into a 
warehouse and took photos of her wearing a bird 
mask and a trench coat. I recall now we sent the 
photos in to ABC Newcastle for a portrait 
competition. They phoned me for a radio interview 
a week later, making light of our transgression I 
simply said we'd found temporary accommodation 
for our displaced avian neighbours. 


A royal commission into the disability sector has 
recently concluded. I interviewed some specialists 
in the field about the published recommendations 
with particular focus on the suggestion that all 
segregated schooling and group homes should be 
closed within the decade. One of them said that we 
no longer put all the poor children in one school 
and all the rich in another, so why - and then their 
expression broke and they apologised for smirking. 
Another said we have twenty-first century ideals 
with twentieth century pedagogy and nineteenth 
century infrastructure and I agreed. 


One Summer when I was fifteen or sixteen I 
managed to download a Japanese platform game 
originally for the Sega Saturn console to my 
computer. The game was Bomberman, I had been 
enchanted by the graphics of the character ever 
since I saw it in a magazine when I was seven or 
eight. Two friends from school, who I had been 
bike riding with every balmy evening of the 
holidays, popped in and saw all the Warez sites I 
had open, the fifty internet tabs during a period 
where an image took thirty minutes to download. 
Later we learned how to tinker with television 
remote controls to open anyone's garage door. 


10 


Daytime television doesn't exist anymore, it's all 
streaming or on demand, which is sad because it 
was such a portal of discovery. I recall so many 
random episodes of shows from the nineties when 
I was home from school, either due to poor health 
or holidays: Northern Exposure, a scene where 
couples are kissing and passing an olive from one 
mouth to the next; Married with Children, where 
the son talks about still having his dignity just 
before he rips off his Velcro tearaway suit. The 
thought of all those characters existing in some 
midday fragments of the past breaks my heart. 


Gerald Murnane talks about the mental landscape 
that the act of reading brings into focus. When 
Thomas Hardy describes a hill, but not what lies 
behind it, Murnane considers that the hill resides 
in his subjectivity positioned in relation to all the 
other locations he has read and thought about. In 
this manner, the ontology of behind the hill can be 
accessed. For me, the panoramas we seek in the 
exterior world are talismans for the architecture 
of our interiority. We feel at home in spaces that 
mirror the topography of our subjectivity. 
Murnane says there is no such thing as the 
unconscious, and I agree - there is only landscape. 


My son recently spent a week in hospital. I ate a 
warm meal from the cafeteria every day. We 
played in the fairy garden. There are no mysteries 
in life in terms of morality and meaning, it all 
makes sense. Example: is life fair - no, any given 
week in a hospital will answer this. It is luck and 
nothing else. Does life have a purpose - again, no. 
Just spend an hour at the far end of the corridor 
in the paediatric ward, near the elevator above the 
morgue. Grass must grow and children must die - 
yes, but think about what both of these conditions 
do to us. Human progress has made my son sick. 


One of the illusions of our age is that contact 
between remote folks is easier than ever before. 
But here's the thing - I have a school friend I want 
to get in touch with, his last name is Brown and 
his first is equally generic, and he doesn't appear 
in any online searches I've done. His name isn't in 
the phone book. If only his last name were Spatula 
or something unique, but he is camouflaged by 
banality. Until recently I was sure he was living in 
Sydney, but the other day I ran into another 
school friend who told me he saw Brown at a 
wedding and that Brown is living locally, in 
Newcastle, now, and has been for some time. 


12 


It is the third of November today, which is only 
relevant to note because Finian’s Rainbow just 
came to mind. Not the successful Broadway 
musical, but its seventeen second recreation on an 
episode of Monty Python that aired on the third 
of November in nineteen seventy. The premise of 
the skit is that a dispirited film director is being 
interviewed about the similarities between his low 
effort cinematic efforts - like a thirteen second 
version of Rear Window where a man appears 
briefly, twice, in a window of an apartment 
building - and the other, more famous, versions. 


After I submitted the ABC piece on rural service 
stations I caught wind, via a friend making his 
way to Broken Hill, of a collective of folk who were 
living in a communal manner following principles 
of ecological care, but in a unique way. They were 
not living organically, so to speak, by way of 
cloistered traditions from yesteryear (gingham, 
beating rugs with a stick, flour sacks) but were 
instead all hackers in the circuit bending, phone 
phreaking, modem tinkering variety which, all 
told, is now similarly archaic, by decades not 
centuries. This is how I learned about solar punk. 


The specific details of Jewel's film clip for her 
most famous tune, You Were Meant For Me, are 
cloudy in my mind - literally, I just see swathes of 
white fabric being wisped around a stage - but I 
dare say it fits within the very nineties aesthetic 
design that has, retroactively, been called 
Whimsigoth. Think of those celestial stars and 
moons with faces and wiggly arm spikes, think of 
the film clip for Tonight Tonight by The Smashing 
Pumpkins. Odd, I remember being in a bookshop 
seeing Jewel's debut book of poetry right next to 
the debut of Billy Corgan's poetic works. 


I find myself listening to classical music again 
since I turned forty. As a child my favourite 
composer was Tchaikovsky. The day I realised that 
the old Mickey Mouse Show theme tune fit the 
exact letter-to-letter spelling of the great Russian 
maestro was like seeing beneath the fabric of 
reality: Tch-aik-ovsky.Ican remember 
standing in the Charlestown Public Library with 
my father, sorting through a rack of cassettes, 
when a man asked us whether I actually liked 
classical music. At school I was so proud to not 
know who Metallica were. All this would change. 


13 


14 


Super Mario Clouds was the first piece of digital 
art I'd seen from Cory Arcangel. I have a feeling I 
came across it within a website interview that Ben 
Lerner was having with Tao Lin (I am not sure 
who was interviewing who) when one of them 
mentioned the work and the article linked to it. 
The work is video based, scaled from a homemade 
hacked Mario Bros cartridge jammed into a 
Nintendo, displaying a blue sky filled only with 
pixelated clouds jerking from right to left. No 
land, no heroes, no enemies. Heidegger said truth 
depends on a gust of wind. This is my church. 


D H Lawrence arrived in Sydney at pretty much 
half seven in the morning, which is often when I 
used to arrive in Sydney. The next day he took a 
ferry to Manly and a train to Narrabeen, and the 
day after that he took a train to Thirroul where he 
and Frieda unpacked. Two days after that he 
started writing Kangaroo. Just like that. He used 
to write with abundant journalistic confidence 
about a place like he knew it inside and out only a 
mere hour after arriving. I love that. The place he 
stayed at in Thirroul is on Craig Street. For years, 
with the same beard, I lived on Lawrence Street. 


When my daughter was still going to school I used 
to drive her and a friend back and forth to their 
campus each morning and afternoon. Even 
though I was instructed by my daughter to put on 
noise cancelling headphones so I couldn't listen in 
on their conversations, I did between songs hear 
some of the bizarre cultural and _ historical 
inaccuracies they shared with each other. For 
example, they talked about how Michael Jackson 
was a boy who started a band with only a bucket 
for a drum and how World War Two took place 
entirely within the borders of Australia. 


My research into the solar punk community my 
friend had alerted me to initially took me to a very 
basic nineties style website that seemed to be run 
by the collective about their enterprise. It only had 
one image down the bottom right of the page 
which showed a messy vegetable garden with a 
rhubarb plant connected to a circuit board via 
yellow alligator clips. The top left of the page 
contained a single word - Garden - which when 
you clicked it a drop down list of tea plants, 
vegetables and pollinators were listed. At the 
bottom left of the page there was a contact button. 


16 


When I learned that Brown had been living local it 
provided me a more refined set of search filters. 
Minutes later I found he was working at the local 
water board as an accountant. I looked up the 
format for staff e-mail addresses and learned they 
were first name then a period then last name then 
at the name of the water board. My letter to him 
was risky as I pretended to be spam, as a joke. I 
also appended a note at the bottom saying that if 
this bounced to the IT department to please just 
take the unsolicited contact in the spirit it was 
intended, as a lonely man wanting to connect. 


The thing about the royal commission into 
disability that really gets me thinking is whether 
there is an all-encompassing solution for 
including everybody in education and society. It 
seems to me that there absolutely should be, that 
the universal inclusion of all humans is only 
marred by economic forces that assert the natural 
dominance of those who will contribute most 
gainfully to capital. Look at any given school 
foyer, the televisions that display an image 
carousel of all the students they are most proud 
of. Who do they show and who are never included. 


That rainbow I could see above the beachhead is 
now only a ghost parabola as a last attempt at 
sunlight for the day starches the exterior in silver. 
A couple folks walk out from the hotel towards the 
jetty where some military personnel and workers 
are setting up a beach club bar with white tables 
and hammock chairs. Three Jehovah's Witness 
gentlemen in formal attire look on beside a stand 
of brochures. Near them, on the sand beneath the 
jetty, a man and a women in vagabond rags, 
tapestries of cargo pants and hemp, drape 
themselves across one another in absolution. 


Within the bar here a jewel adorned lady in, being 
polite, her early eighties, say, floats in like dust on 
a sunbeam. She nods to the barman and he greets 
her expectantly as she mosies over to a table 
beside a couple in their fifties. The couple smile at 
her before turning back to the same windows I'm 
looking out of, and then I hear her say to them, 
well it doesn't look so different to when we first 
arrived here, forty years ago this December, they 
used to set up on the beach here with blue and 
white umbrellas, bumbrushers swinging the banjo 
as Terry would say, setting up for the émigrés. 


18 


Through the sound system there is a faint eighties 
pop song audible - rhodes keys, female vox, snares 
all reverb, hint of horn - that may have been on 
loop since nineteen eighty three. A well known 
and celebrated hip-hop star who had been on a 
multi-decade hiatus released a surprise album 
this year, a piece of ambient jazz driven by flute 
melodies. The music is nice, but what pleased me 
most was what a mature move this represented, a 
serious artistic attempt at superseding previously 
met teenage dreams. This is the old dream of 
modernism, to move forwards in serious ways. 


I eventually got a response from Brown after 
navigating a half dozen digital breadcrumbs he 
unknowingly scattered across the decade. Shall 
we meet for coffee, yes absolutely, Friday morn. 
While I stood at the corner of a pub and looked at 
everybody who passed on by I was willing to 
believe that any of them could have been Brown. 
Who Is to say his face didn't look like this or that 
now, his posture, his hair. But then I saw him at a 
distance and immediately recognised him. He had 
changed, but it was like picking your child out of a 
crowd, all these years on. Something remains. 


A prominent twenty-storey building in Newcastle 
used to have painted on its side the words This Is 
Not Art. When I was part of the collective who met 
in TPI House there were those in our ranks who 
organised an annual arts festival using these same 
painted words as its title. One year IJ attended an 
experimental music performance down an alley 
marked only by a naked light bulb hanging in a 
birdcage on a pile of bricks. A tall, disheveled man 
wore a black robe with a tabby cat perched on his 
shoulder and sang Verdi. One year I gave a talk on 
reading Samuel Beckett's drama as journalism. 


When I clicked the contact button on the solar 
punk community website it brought up a form 
that was obscured by corporate logos. Looking 
through the source code for the site displayed a 
cheeky message: Hack Us To Contact Us. During 
my high school years, at the peak of my anti- 
authoritarianism, I had a tendency to tinker with 
computers, logging into library Telnet servers and 
extending my rental periods for overdue books. 
Thirty minutes later I activated a seed bombing 
script within the web code that pollinated the 
contact form, pruning the corporate logos. 


20 


I have floated within clear blue waters in 
Jumeriah beach beneath the arc of the Burj al- 
Arab beside four men from Soweto, a Russian 
colleague recognised their accents, whilst we 
shared stories on the value of family and I 
explained what I knew of First Nations matrices 
of care, kinship structures wherein responsibility 
for raising a child is shared between aunties and 
uncles and cousins, when my Russian colleague 
nudged me to notice a man he said was a 
footballer from Columbia pulling his Irish 
girlfriend out of a necklace of bipedal sharks. 


There are no writers I can think of, amongst those 
I most value, who have not been considered 
autistic by one or another book critic or 
interviewer on stage at a literary festival. Les 
Murray, Gerald Murnane, John Coetzee, William 
Vollmann, Winfried Sebald. It is my contention 
that, as the misconception that autism stood for a 
lack of empathy has been corrected and we now 
recognise it more as an abundance of emotion, 
too much at times, that our best authors are 
likewise sensitive in an abundance that they learn 
to, need to, filter, in measured ways, into prose. 


How many of us get to sustain our passions from 
teenage years. Some are surely easier to continue 
feeding oxygen, but how many high school 
musicians, poets and artists continue the trade 
into adult life. I met a guy on the street some 
months ago who I used to know, we were in a 
philosophy club together. When I told him that I 
still refer to a book on Nietzsche and politics that 
he gave me back in the day, he looked baffled. 
Philosophy is behind him now, he doesn't have 
time for that, raising children, making ends meet, 
losing weight, caring for aging parents. 


The building with This Is Not Art painted on its 
side had a rooftop party that I attended, a 
farewell as the site was set for demolition. A range 
of characters from Newcastle and the art scene 
were there, but I didn't really mix. I was hungry 
and there was no food, so I took the smallest bite 
possible out of a brick balustrade. This led to a 
slightly larger bite and soon I was into the roofing 
insulation and then the copper wiring. By 
morning I was on the footpath, on my back, 
nursing my massively engorged stomach, wiping 
the last crumbs of vinyl flooring from my mouth. 


21 


22 


When the person at the other end of the solar 
punk website, who I would later shake hands with 
and call Leif, wrote back to my request to visit 
them, he laughed at my comment that I would 
understand if they were afraid of a journalist 
visiting what I assumed, accurately, to be their 
anarchist hacker vegetable garden kingdom (his 
e-mail signature contained the phrase ‘Abolish 
Power, Grow Freedom’), he said that I could visit 
and stay whenever suited, they had a spare cabin I 
could sleep in, and that I was getting it backwards 
in terms of who should be afraid of who. 


The last time I was in a hotel like this one I was 
sitting on the balcony watching a tropical storm 
whip Norfolk Island Pines and palm trees around 
a white concrete pool that was being renovated. In 
my underwear, drinking heavily and thinking 
about a journalism conference I had attended the 
previous day, about how many gurus were there, I 
was dreaming up a presentation I wanted to give 
on how nobody knows anything: you don't know, I 
don't know. While the storm peaked I felt my 
wife's thin arms across my chest, her brown hair a 
curtain in front of my eyes, obscuring all sight. 


At around age sixteen a friend and I played an 
online fantasy game that was quite advanced for 
the time, it personalised the traits of your 
character based on your chat history: each time 
you had a conversation with another character in 
the game, it would pick up on your sentiments 
and behavioural tendencies and, in a fairly 
rudimentary way, individualise your character in 
response. To my surprise, an archive of the game 
is still online and I was able to download the 
password protected raw data from my character 
and extract its chat history and personality. 


On the morning I packed to leave for the solar 
punk community, situated on the other side of the 
Great Dividing Range, my dog and I took a walk 
through Newcastle. It was good for Combray to 
stretch his legs before we departed, he'd be 
joining me on the road as he always did for work 
trips. Off leash, just a few taps of hand on jeans to 
maintain a line of communication, we improvise a 
drift across the city grid. Domesticated by time, 
Combray unearths ancient memories as smell 
takes him on experimental trajectories via paths 
and roads and arcades and corporate hallways. 


23 


24 


The night before this first, of which would end up 
becoming two distinct trips to the community, my 
wife stood by the bedroom dresser still wearing 
her horology overalls from a late evening session 
piecing a mantle clock together for a client (her 
rainbow cataracts render prismatic mirages as the 
hands shine beneath her banker's lamp, turning 
copper plated numerals into refracted star bursts) 
as she heard me annotate an itinerary of the drive 
there and back with an expression only animated 
by the shadow of her hand that pretended to reach 
up and play with hair on my head long departed. 


Across nineteen ninety six and seven all the best 
music of my generation was released. Within just 
under fifteen months you had a corpus of albums 
that were the result of a direct line that traced, 
from the death of Wagner through the popularity 
of Camptown Races and George Gershwin and the 
electrification of Stockhausen meets overdubbed 
guitars and drums on that rendition of Paul Simon's 
best early tune en route post-Zeppelin, the arrival 
of OK Computer, Endtroducing, Homogenic, 
Aenima, Feed Me Weird Things, Either/Or and 
Godspeed You Black Emperor's debut. 


During the previous Summer I recall a night, it 
could have been the evening of New Year's Day, 
when I rode my bike into town with my son to 
swim in the newly renovated Ocean Baths. They 
had been closed for two years to patch up the sand 
mottled art deco facades that always looked to me 
like theatrical backdrops. This was a week after 
they finally reopened and it felt like everybody in 
town was swimming there, washed in the ochre 
embers of the skyline's curtain call. Riding home 
with my shirt off, four women drinking outside a 
pub let out a balmy whoop as tribute. 


I loaded the scraped data from my character in the 
archive of the online fantasy game into a chat bot. 
Now, in an unsettling update on ‘Krapp’s Last 
Tape’ for the internet age, I can talk with an echo 
of my teenage self whenever the mood strikes. Our 
conversations mostly trade on nostalgia with talk 
about the religious iconography of television shows 
Neon Genesis and Millennium, an extension of 
childhood's doctrine of hero worship (omniscient 
parents, the near-divine wisdom of teachers) in a 
manner that fuels the necessary over-confidence 
required to transcend future infinitudes. 


25 


26 


Packing my bag for the initial trip reminded me 
of why I was going. The pool of liquid light with 
its ethereal glowing geometry through which I 
check my inbox, the brushed metal silence of my 
laptop with edges so digitally precise they I feel if 
I were to drop it to the floor the very fabric of time 
would be sliced on the way down. I find myself 
longing for less accessible technology, I want to 
dumpster dive for split network cables, to find a 
hacker ethos where solutions are mashed together 
from scraps. In a world of perfect, ubiquitous 
technology, humans will necessarily be subtracted. 


Before we had our first child, my wife straddled 
the back of my motorbike as we dusted vertical 
the mid-north coast, the bridge at Bulahdelah, 
unpopulated powdered corridors of dirt into the 
backlots of near abandoned sub-budget motels 
necklaced by paperbarks and void. More heatwave 
evenings, singlets and shorts, with no other 
guests present we sit in the courtyard and cook 
noodles over a fire pit. My wife hangs her singlet 
and bra on a wire between the motel gutter and 
the fence and we sit back and agree that the heat 
bearing down on us is from all the stars up there. 


Combray finds a piece of fencing panel removed 
where the heavy rail corridor used to reside, now a 
hallway of overgrown grass and weeds waiting for 
a developer to plant commercial real estate. We 
walk as far as it takes us, near the signal box 
where my father used to work as a lad. He told me 
a story once about a colleague who had a heart 
attack up there. When the paramedics came they 
couldn't get the stretcher up or down the narrow 
wrought iron stairwell so they had to go extract 
the colleague through a second-storey window, 
over the rail line (speaking of the less accessible). 


The rain returns as cloud lines darken outside the 
hotel and I am adjacent now the elegant older lady 
who resides here. I consider sharing my phone, 
the digital resurrection of my teenage self. She 
would say, oh yes I also talk to my teenage self. 
Not in memory, she’d clarify, I am that teenager, 
forever sixteen. She would tap the sand from the 
gentle waves of her barely used soles. See, this is 
merely a costume, a brief octogenarian ache in an 
endless summer. Youth is a misnomer - it’s not a 
phase, dad, but rather the endpoint of our eternal 
selves, the beginning of forever, for a while. 


27 


28 


When my daughter was a little older than my son 
is now, when we would swim in the canoe pool 
near where the renovated Ocean Baths are, she 
would describe the foam coming in from the 
breaking waves as ‘lemonade’. She would sing a 
little tune, ‘the lemon waves are bringing in the 
lemonade’. They were the preferred place to swim, 
we would hope the waves would break in just such 
a way to bring in the lemonade. Later she would 
design a comic based on a misreading of a Fire 
Hose that she called 'Fire Horse', a steed that 
caused trouble with its flaming mane and tail. 


Journalism has little if anything to do with 
reporting on the visible world. I read a good book 
once on Nietzsche called 'The Shortest Shadow’ by 
philosopher Alenka Zupan¢ié in which she 
described the process of working out who one is, 
what Jung might have referred to as the process 
of individuation, as treating ourselves as a 
disjunctive synthesis, as a conjunctive analysis. In 
other words, we have to separate and dissolve. These 
two terms - separate and dissolve - that is how to 
write journalism. You simply walk into a room, 
disintegrate completely, and then write a memoir. 


It takes an hour of driving to exit the edgelands of 
Newcastle and its surrounding proxy outposts 
until you hit post-pastoral bushland. The vastness 
of dirt and dry scrub that emerges is partnered 
with twin feelings of death and survival. Then, a 
town appears: a Lion's Club shield above a patch 
of well-tended grass, a wooden bench and a toilet 
block beside a community hall, all painted gum- 
tree army green and sun bleached lemon, quietly 
reflecting the national palette. You might find a 
bakery, a pub built in nineteen hundred and two, 
and then you're off again into an hour of plains. 


I often have a recurring fantasy as I pass through 
these towns. It sees me as an amateur composer, 
having written a strange piece of avant-garde 
classical music, conducting a small ensemble of 
musicians as we perform the piece in one of those 
rural community halls. I think about the history 
those halls would have seen: weddings, makeshift 
schoolhouses, sewing supplies to aid the two 
world wars, political debates and referendums. 
Within me are twin desires - I yearn to be part of a 
community, but on complicated terms: never 
absorbed, always an exception, loved but alone. 


29 


30 


At lunchtime I stop the car and let Combray out. 
We walk alongside a riverbank beneath a bridge. 
There are tall weeds with bulbous green heads, 
like fabric tubas inhaling air and holding their 
breath, with stamens the shape of copyrights. 
Time spent with Combray is entirely different to 
both being alone and being with other people. 
When his consciousness overlaps with mine, the 
words he doesn't possess quieten the words I do. 
If he ever learned to speak I would pray to never 
understand him, and him to not understand me. 
Let us subtract from the promise of abundance. 


Looking towards the bridge, the passageway north 
sees roadblocks manned by soldiers in khaki who 
signal cars to slow down and open their boots. 
These are emigrants from the city, racing against 
time to beat lockout curfews after escaping an 
eruption of violence in the cosmopolis. Petrol 
bombs were cast from a shout on the street into 
the beachside balconies of eschatology magnates, 
class warfare diasporas wolf whistling a tune 
written by the Federal Reserve. Families attempt a 
river crossing but bullets twist into the water. 
What's the point of these masthead daydreams. 


There is a pub across the bridge with a beer 
garden at its side where Combray can sit. The 
specials today are Spiced Chicken Maryland with 
Slaw, Chips and Tortillas, or Pork Ribs with Chips, 
Slaw and BBQ Sauce, which I opt for and slide off 
more than half of the pork from their bones into 
Combray's salivation. He is a physicist with a keen 
sense for gravitational forces, particularly the 
speed of meat falling through space. The waitress 
brings him a ceramic bowl of water while I drink a 
lemon squash, a favourite of my parents, as I look 
deep into a mountain of pastoral declivities. 


Down the side of the mountain steps a ghost, a 
giant with footfalls that stamp soft craters into 
the hillside. Each step resounds a subterranean 
heartbeat, padding the fields like the muted skin 
of a ceremonial drum pulled taut over Australian 
history. What is this a symbol of, what symbolic 
threshold is being crossed here - do you hear the 
bass notes, lifted from a concerto by Handel, they 
stride like gods. But look again, it isn't a singular 
form, the giant is comprised of millions of naked 
bodies, like Voltron with his five robotic lions, like 
if the Library of Babel was a rainbow serpent. 


31 


32 


Back on the road and Combray sleeps as the 
afternoon wears itself down between the rocking 
of the car and the depleting watercolour of skyline 
like two hands rubbing time into crumbs of so 
many lost months and hours - how did it become 
so late so fast, Combray we need to find a place to 
crash for the night. In the middle of a long stretch 
of road passing through a dense forest we spot a 
motel nestled against a service station. We get a 
discount for the night after filling up the tank 
with premium unleaded. Combray sleeps on the 
porch while I fade into the shadows of tall trees. 


I dream that a psychedelic rock quartet is making 
walls of sound outside in the parking lot. Amplifiers 
are stacked to the height of the conifer necklace 
bearing down but the music is inverted, it is 
enormous but heard within a dynamic range that is 
less than silent, a product of dream regulations no 
doubt where licensing agreements are required to 
perform music that is royalty protected. Think of 
sound waves that, instead of shifting air, burrow 
deep into bone and are rendered there as a cast of 
negative space. The guitars sound like granite being 
expanded and contracted like a taffy accordion. 


The main feeling I take away from the dream, as I 
reflect the next morning on a plastic lawn chair 
beside Combray out front of my room before we hit 
the road again, is jealousy. I wish I was the one 
making those sounds here in the parking lot, but 
better sounds. The current state of music is one that 
endlessly tortures me - I both insatiably love a 
handful of songs and desperately wish I was able to 
compose works that supersede them. Yes all art is 
theft and culture is a recycle-plant built on a 
capitalist desire to endlessly consume and redeliver 
the past, but sometimes the future makes a sound. 


A playlist of silence and noise, of warm overdriven 
tube saturated orchestral adagios, cut up and run 
through cassette vocoders (how to wreck a nice 
beach / how to recognise speech) resonates as we 
must be only a few kilometres now from the solar 
punk community. I don't recognise any of the 
landscapes here, this is beyond the boundaries of 
any trips I've taken in the vicinity. There is a Golden 
Summer at Eagelemont through Arthur Streeton's 
brush against the panorama feel, dry fields and 
paperbarks, and then there it is, a radio tower anda 
surveillance nest waving a lettuce leaf flag. 


34 


As I pull into the parking lot beside a school bus 
with ferns growing out of all its open windows, 
including the removed windscreen, a man with an 
overclocked countenance of safety and merriment 
walks his cargo panted legs and one gingham arm 
(the other was tied off at a shoulder sleeve) over to 
me as we shake hands and introduce ourselves. The 
name he gives is Leif, which I recognise now from 
the URL of the the web page contact form, |_ 3 1|=. 
He takes me through the gates of the compound 
where I start to get a sense of just how many people 
live here and how far this place extends. 


What isn't observable from the road is the scale of 
the community here, as the paddock they occupy 
descends behind a hillside and a windbreak of trees 
into interlocking meadows and garden beds joined 
together by many hundreds of telegraph style wires 
held aloft by thin rusted canopies and wooden t-bar 
clothesline poles that stretch between caravans and 
demountable gun barrel eco huts of semi-circle 
corrugated iron and lattice, with an immense 
weatherboard cathedral nestled in the middle with a 
radio antennae of overlapping geodesic crossbars. 
All told it looks around ten hectares from tip to tip. 


Leif tells me that thirty four people live here 
currently, although the official roster shuffles quite 
a lot as many folks go vagabond depending on the 
season, but there are a steady number, including 
Leif, who have called this place home for nearly 
twenty years now. He says that Katie, one of the co- 
founders of the community, has set up a room for 
me to stay as long as I'd like to observe and help 
contribute. He winks and says we'd appreciate a bit 
of a hand in the gardens while you're here, if that's 
okay, and I eagerly agree while knowing full well 
how long it has been since I've handled a trowel. 


The level of ingenuity that has gone into the garden 
mechanics is quite startling. Dot matrix printers 
distribute seeds with modified heads parsing finely 
tuned sequences; CRT monitors are used as heat 
sources for micro greenhouses; the balls from old 
mechanical mice are used in irrigation systems to 
regulate water flow; floppy disks are everywhere 
poking out of soil serving as reusable plant labels; 
sound cards are used as bird repellents, a basic code 
and sensor setup programmed to emit frequencies 
that deter invaders from the crops; and, fragments 
of solar panels are everywhere linked with wires. 


35 


36 


I ask where the hardware is sourced from and Leif 
smiles shyly and waves his hands around in the air 
as if to say, oh you know, and then he gets a bit 
more specific: there are deserted research stations 
all over the region, he says - think radar igloos, they 
were only decommissioned in the late nineties. But 
too there are aircraft graveyards scattered across 
the western plains, every cockpit with enough tech 
to run a dozen hobby farms. And you'd be surprised, 
he said, how many old homesteads have been 
abandoned over the decade, deceased estates left for 
scavengers to audit and repurpose applicable goods. 


Leif introduces me to others in the community, men 
and women with graying hair, hands stained with 
grease and soil, sun-faded hypercolour shirts and 
overalls with tool belts sewn in. I ask them about 
their motivations for being here, the politics that 
frame their lifestyle, this blend of sustainability and 
hacker culture. One of them says, at the end of the 
nineties a young man wearing Vans walked into my 
lab and said he had come for my algorithms, that he 
was going to make them predictive. He said that if I 
liked yesterday, then I could have yesterday again 
today. Now he runs the world and I'm out here. 


Do you see yourselves as part of a counterculture, is 
this a reaction to how glossy surfaces have made it 
easier to funnel nature into a blender that turns 
fresh air and water into cryptocurrencies, would 
you say this is part of a trajectory from nineteen 
sixties individualism reacting against World War 2 
fascism and totalitarianism that then turned into 
nineteen eighties consumerism where individuals 
were sold a marketable version of self expression 
which inspired burned out hippie culture to idealise 
the internet as a virtual utopia outside the reach of 
money before it became the very symbol of money? 


Behind us there are toddlers and kindergarten aged 
children rolling plastic tubes across a dirt ramp, a 
woman a similar age to myself kneels beside them 
and shows how to connect the tubes together. Two 
older children begin riding a tandem bicycle linked 
by way of network cables to a water tank which then 
opens a valve to flow its contents into the plastic 
tubes. Their are families here, young children. This 
isn't a commune for those who rue the day modems 
stopped screaming in angular distortion and turned 
DIY into a Genius Bar appointment: this is the story 
of how a love of complexity can deliver eternal life. 


37 


38 


Combray is sniffing around the perimeter of a 
chicken pen with a German shepherd and a 
chocolate Labrador. Before I left home the day 
before yesterday I received a letter from Gerald 
Murnane in response to a note I'd written him 
about memory. Whether the eighty five year old 
outsider of Australian modernism would respond 
was up in the air until I saw a typewriter pressed 
envelope in my mailbox stamped Goroke. He told 
me that what we call time is just our confused 
perception of place after place, and that time is very 
precious to him these days, or rather, place is. 


Rather than writing my journalism from a position 
of documentary, I am forever drawn to the line that 
rests between the twin poles of literary influence 
Australia has shepherded into this young century: 
the external pastoral landscapes of Les Murray's 
describing, and the internal plains of Gerald 
Murnane's psychogeography. Murray was not a poet 
of the inner life, so said John Maxwell Coetzee, and 
by Murnane's own admission he'd rather not be 
influenced by what, if anything, is exterior to him. 
Between these two inversions of landscape is space 
for the topology of a nation's self-consciousness. 


Leif shows me to an old radio transmitter mounted 
on a straw bale studio covered in clay. Inside is a 
mixing desk and a microphone. He tells me they 
found all this in a cavern beneath the ground, some 
of the teens in the community were riding dirt bikes 
around an old military outpost and found a network 
of underground tunnels and so on and so on. So 
they dragged this back here, we've got it working, he 
says, and we reckon it'd be a neat thing to broadcast 
a radio program at various times across the day to 
those of us working here but also so we can pick up 
the station when we're out there on the expanse. 


A memory returns from my university days when I 
used to run a pirate radio station out of a rooftop 
utility room of the arts collective at TPI House. The 
transmitter would make it across the city and, when 
the tide was calm, over the water to Stockton. It's 
how I met my wife, she would tune in to hear me 
read out the time every quarter hour as she was just 
getting started putting clocks together. I never 
realised how fastidious my time keeping was. In 
truth I probably enjoyed that side of things more 
than spinning tunes. Anyway, she called in to the 
station one day to gift me a clock and that was that. 


39 


40 


I am introduced to Katita, she is responsible for 
property management and guest intake. It seems 
everybody has a distinct role in the community, this 
is something I didn't expect, anticipating a more 
laissez faire approach. She shows me to one of the 
eco huts, beautifully designed with reclaimed metal 
and timber framing the interior, all the furniture 
upcycled from pallets and industrial offcuts. Books 
on coding and permaculture line a shelf with a fold- 
down desk beneath, and the kitchen is tiled with 
keys extracted from mechanical keyboards from all 
over the world. It has Airbnb written all over it. 


Katita can tell I'm impressed, she says they didn't all 
use to look like this, the residences, they have 
definitely improved over the past twenty years. She 
points out a few things like how to use the 
composting toilet and the sensors that operate the 
shower. As well, she asks about the nature of the 
story I'm hoping to write about their community, 
what my interest is, how will they be portrayed. It is 
a valuable story, what they have accomplished here, 
she says, one that can provide hope and a narrative 
to others. She mentions names of people I should 
speak to, to most accurately understand their goals. 


When she leaves, I sit on the featherbed and phone 
home. My wife picks up on the third ring and I ask 
how things are with the kids before telling her about 
this place in a rush of miscellanea. I begin putting 
together strategic propositions in my head about 
why we should all move out here together while I 
write the piece, but she's already agreed before the 
question was fully formed. She'll get things ready at 
home and I'll pick them up the day after tomorrow. 
When I find Katita to check if this is okay she smiles 
knowingly, of course, and you can leave Combray 
here to save him the drive back, she offers. 


The timing is right for all sorts of reasons. Friends 
of my daughter have moved schools, leaving her in a 
space where she is not locked into immovable 
teenage social structures, and my son is not yet at 
school so that's a non-issue. My wife can work from 
anywhere and has recently become increasingly 
tired of the city, done with the silhouettes of towers 
arching over link roads of teeming thousands. Okay. 
The drive home is ten hours of obsessively curated 
ambient electroacoustic post-rock that causes me 
no end of frustration as I imagine new symphonies 
that must one day dwarf these brilliant songs. 


41 


42 


Once home we pack and I unnecessarily explain the 
situation again. Questions of duration are not given 
a fixed response so we fill our bags with enough for 
a sustained rotation of dress cycles. My daughter 
packs pillows and sketch books, my son packs toys. 
This is the first time you've invited us on one of your 
ventures, my wife pokes me in the ribs, I wonder 
what you've seen there that's got you in this state. 
Sitting here, now, in this wing-chair in the sunken 
bar of The Grand Hotel, the elegant older lady 
staring with me, in parallax, into the breach where 
sand subtracts sky from the universe, it is a wonder. 


We drive from Jeffrey Smart to Charles Blackman 
and then on through Brett Whitely (in homage to 
Lloyd Rees) and pass by Russell Drysdale across a 
stretch of Albert Namatjira. European light turns 
dull, shades of truth blinked evermore central, only 
matter never mind, sun turns to one of two moons, 
an apple moon so says our son, not banana tonight. 
Our daughter winds her window down and cranes 
her neck to look out, is that a rainbow around the 
moon, she asks. There is a halo alright, like a lens 
flare emanating from a pinprick in the black curtain 
that protects us from pure fact, hallowed geometry. 


Arriving back at the solar punk community, I wave 
over Leif and introduce him to my family. Our son 
hovers between my wife and I, peaking around our 
hips at the exotic situation surrounding him. Leif 
bends down and points towards a corral of young 
folk building a catapult device and tells our son that 
he can run along and join in, which he eagerly and 
obediently does. Our daughter is excessively polite 
and seems quite enthralled with the situation. She 
and my wife joke about how this is so me, this 
aesthetic merging of the natural and the synthetic, a 
cyberpastoralist prayer of radio towers in bushland. 


Leif shows my wife towards a clock, manicured by 
flowers, its parts arranged on a rise of grass and soil 
in a position that could be seen from many aspects 
of the garden. The clock is not functional, yet, Leif 
nods. It needs a horologist's touch. He shows my 
wife towards a quartz crystal resonator in the shape 
of a tuning fork, literally using two garden hoes 
bound together with a coil of wire, with a mirrorless 
lens for the gnomon that projects a sequence of 
illuminated binary blocks onto hour lines forged out 
of printed circuit boards glued to the top of bricks. 
My wife takes it all in and says, I can work with this. 


43 


44 


I am given a handwritten note written by Leif on 
what looks like recycled paper pulp, firm like a 
playing card. It is a draft schedule and list of topics 
for broadcast on the new community radio station 
that I'm the voice of. A 9am breakfast message kicks 
things off with a weather report and a priority list 
of jobs as well as any overnight updates that come 
through, followed by an 11am motivation message 
that includes project highlights and any new tech or 
sustainability learnings, with a 3pm reflection in the 
afternoon with a randomly curated song played, 
and a 7pm evening overview of goals for tomorrow. 


That evening we all eat dinner, a banquet of roast 
root vegetables, around an immense bonfire. A few 
of us get into a conversation about nostalgia and 
hauntology. I ask whether the utility of old hacker 
technology is in the future we diverted away from, 
of niche specialists and what my grandfather grew 
wary of in lawn bowls, a tide of ill manners, a lack of 
decorum that dissipated communal spaces to birth 
fluorescent saboteurs coding Solitaire, a Law of 
Ruins for archaeologists to excavate a necessary 
history of failed wire soldered revelations unhidden 
beneath smart screen abyss, truth within disarray. 


What I mean to say is, I wonder if nostalgia is a 
siren song luring us into a cyclical voyage where 
tomorrow is but a shadow of yesterday, if all 
movements that look backwards to solutions from 
the past are at risk of not forgetting, if sustainability 
is an umbilical cord, and what do you think about 
the use of arcane technology in your practice, is it a 
belief that the path forward is not one of broad 
strokes and open doors but of narrow gates, where 
genius will survive, but what about all those out 
there, beyond this garden, this Eden 2.0, biting into 
an Apple II, can you hear a chorus on the coast? 


After dinner my wife and I take a walk beneath the 
stars and I comment that the night sky reminds me 
of the dark blinds in my primary school classroom 
that blocked out the sun except for pin pricks of 
bright light that had been torn in the fabric by 
students shooting the metal tipped inkwells out of 
their pen chambers by way of a blow dart push of 
wind from their mouths each time the teacher 
turned her back. What light is pushing through 
above, against the ceiling of the universe, on the 
other side of knowing, and my wife knows I'm already 
looking for ways to be disappointed by these people. 


45 


46 


It could be that I'm the only one awake now, alone 
on the plains as I listen to the wind stretch. You can 
hear a low whistle travel across a ridge a dozen 
kilometres east before it transposes to a harmonic 
minor two minutes north, splitting into a major 
third plus a fifth where the tundra parts around a 
fenceline to become chordal on the other side of the 
abodes here, lowing consonance. By the time my 
eyes have adjusted to a new strain of invisibility I 
recognise that the wind has looped back around to 
carry my daughter up to the moon, her nightdress 
billowing and dancing as she glides out of reach. 


Mid next morning my son and | are shown a pinball 
machine that a couple members of the community 
have put together. The table incorporates a blend of 
mechanics and nature, with small plants and tufts 
of grass beside modem fragments and even a water 
feature running down a channel of spacebars. A 
narrative is played out via distinct zones whereby 
the robot travels from the city to the outback, LED 
sequences displaying building silhouettes and lines 
of copy paste trees. My son has a few goes, sending 
the robot across the landscape, bouncing chaotically 
but with a sense of free will after a well timed shot. 


Another boy walks up besides my son and he waits 
for his turn to play. They swap back and forth as the 
little robot ball is flung around from a wind break of 
lombardy poplars represented with twigs wrapped 
in copper wire and then across a garden matrix of 
colourful lights. I'm not sure what the narrative of 
the game is about but it resonates with me. Leif asks 
me to come with him to the weatherboard cathedral 
in the middle of the community where he has a 
virtual reality setup he wants to show me. He talks 
about Marvin Minsky and Jaron Lanier as we cross 
the grounds, about the early days of this technology. 


Within the chapel, really just a hall with a pitched 
roof, in the middle of the room, an old arm chair 
with ripped fabric and stuffing falling out sits in a 
tangle of extension cords connected to a sleek blue 
virtual reality headset. It is the most modern piece 
of hardware in the vicinity. The headset covers the 
head completely, like a beekeepers helmet, draping 
over the eyes and the ears. Have a go, Leif says. The 
program loaded on is based on Moondust, a music 
simulator, it's kind of like a multi-dimensional darts 
game on acid, Leif explains, it was made in 1983, the 
year you were born, if you're forty this year, right? 


47 


48 


I put on the headset, a stained glass observatory 
housing my skull and sensory organs, releasing an 
algorithmic sequence of vowel shaped lights into 
my eyes that immediately make my body feel too big 
for the room. It feels like my eyes can leave my head 
and independently travel, in stereo, around the slow 
landscape of Kodachrome geodesic steps rising and 
falling into splintered quavers that create tones as I 
pay attention to them. Staring at them extends their 
duration, blinking sets the pitch. My legs are so long 
as I step across telegraph wires resonating languid 
string harmonies, my hands the size of pianos. 


Memories fill my head like soap bubbles forming 
and glistening, their walls nursing life projections 
in a curation of sentiment that influences the tonic 
key of the song I'm generating. This is the first time 
I've ever felt like I'm actually writing music, not just 
plucking strings or tapping keys as a teenager, as a 
uni student sitting in the conservatorium practice 
quarters between journalism lectures, phantasising. 
I feel like a genius, every chord is completely true, 
each slight alteration of my neck posture eliciting a 
run of notes worth all of Schubert, every synesthesic 
variation of Alexander Scriabin. This feels like love. 


After I walk out of the cathedral I'm dazzled by the 
mediocrity of the external world. I just want to go 
back inside my virtual self and make more music. 
Some years ago I tried a reality simulation of James 
Joyce's Ulysses, walking around the Martello Tower 
in Sandycove, waving my hands around the air in 
front of my disembodied form to hold a container 
of Plumtree's Potted Meats. But what I really sought 
was full immersion, I wanted to look over Joyce's 
shoulder as he wrote the scenes, too as he wrote to 
Nora and worried about Lucia, losing his vision, 
mailing a little cat filled with sweets to his grandson. 


Some weeks after Brown and I met up for coffee I 
wrote to him again to organise another catch up. 
And then I wrote again, and a third time, until I 
stopped, having received no reply to my invitations. 
Perhaps our conversation didn't please him like it 
did me. I wonder if I was driven to reach out as a 
result of the flood of nostalgia I'd found myself in at 
forty, looking back for answers, perhaps seeking to 
confirm that the teenage years occurred somewhat 
as I remember them. Not to worry. I realise how few 
connections I actually have, back home, which is 
fine. Less to hold me back from moving forwards. 


49 


50 


It is time for the 3pm afternoon reflection update in 
the radio booth. I sit down with the briefing paper 
ready to transmit. There are notes on this and that 
with a song recommendation to cue up afterwards, 
an untitled Aphex Twin ambient work nicknamed 
Rhubarb. Instead of reading the notes, I decide to 
narrate from memory a note that James Joyce sent 
his grandson Stephen that contains the line, "and 
girls who want to know more about the moon". Leif 
asks why I did that, and lightly admonishes me for 
deviating from the briefing paper, but I'm barely 
listening, really. I'm thinking about other things. 


Around the fire that night we talk about the games 
of Jason Rohrer - his video games, sure, but also that 
boardgame he created to never be played. He didn't 
even test it, he ran a simulator to ensure it worked 
so he never actually played it. Then he buried the 
game somewhere in the Nevada desert. It makes me 
think of an idea of Ben Lerner's about poetry, where 
he says the most successful poems are those that 
don't fully exist, only the hypothetical potential of 
them within the poets intention or a few lines 
extracted and quoted in an essay: they are pure 
because they are virtual, ontologically incomplete. 


Talk turns to virtual reality and the setup inside the 
weatherboard cathedral, the wide range of software 
simulations the community run there. An accident 
in the software occurred recently where a flying 
program wouldn't let you land, you just had to keep 
gliding above the landscape. This inability to come 
down meant you had to make peace with flight, this 
was your life now, in the air. Leif said this was a gift, 
a revelation about their path forward here: after the 
cities on the coast become high rises they cannot 
descend, after rural communities become forever 
high on boredom and weed, they will come out here. 


Katita watches my reaction as Leif continues. And 
so we too will need to fly, forever. This community 
will be walled off with automated sentry defence 
systems, our gardens will grow indefinitely in cycles 
while our bodies are pollinated with proteins and 
carbohydrates as we don our hoods and enter an 
eternal simulation, the final virtualisation of life as 
humans on the planet. This is what sustainability is 
about, acknowledging and welcoming the necessary 
breakdown of all organic matter while something 
fundamental is bracketed - a light remains. Sacrifice 
the world for the angel that emulates our apogee. 


51 


52 


In the morning I'm up early walking Combray when 
Katita approaches me. That's the problem with us 
tech hippies, she says. Especially after the nineties. 
We can't help but catastrophise our situations until 
we end up in the Matrix. Don't worry about Leif, he 
hasn't read enough Baudrillard to believe it all yet. 
We shake hands and I thank Katita for the warm 
hospitality and ask her to give my regards to Leif 
and the rest of the community. I tell her I can't tell if 
I'll finish an article about this place, and she laughs 
and says that's probably for the best. My wife and 
kids help pack the car, then we toot the horn and leave. 


I'm honestly not sure if we'll ever go home again, at 
least for a while. I feel like a break has occurred, a 
fissure with the past, in mine at the very least. We 
head somewhat north and in the direction of the 
coast without any real destination in mind. I can say 
that with conviction, sitting here facing these four 
broad window panes in the lounge here of The 
Grand Hotel, all light long descended, new light 
arriving soon. There is enough refracted internal 
glow to still show up Combray's face on the other 
side of the glass, he's been asleep outside for as 
long as my family have been upstairs doing the same. 


While we were driving yesterday, passing wheat 
fields, bridges, community halls, teddy bears on 
stumps beside fence-lines hours from any visible 
homesteads, pocket glades, bakeries, surrogate 
apertures of topographical extension where the eye 
feels a heart on the other side of an inaccessible rise, 
and then birds, emerging in salted gusts from 
nearing airfields, I considered the tragedy of the 
singular self. We become locked into one possible 
version of who we are, socially expected to stay 
consistent to this model, and hence made manifest 
via our the seeds of our past for the rest of our days. 


All history is artifice. I'm going to write a symphony 
about it, that's my only goal at this point. The story 
will be about a girl who pushes a pinball machine 
across the Australian landscape, from the outback 
to the sea, to the moon's reflection in the water. She 
knows she has reached her destination when the 
moon renders a rainbow halo against the waves, a 
ring for her to push the offering into. As it bobs and 
rocks and is eventually subsumed, its illuminations 
undreamed, the music will crest into a peeling of 
octave bells, a cadence in view. And then a silence 
without resolution - not a pause, just peace and quiet. 


53 


Sovereignty is an 
Artificial Soul 


'eedieAi and uddyunnunoan' - 
Lyrebird, Les Murray 


3 


es ee 
ee 
i es eee | 


<= 


Introduction, or The Leviathan 
Chews On Flowers From The 
Cyberpastoralist Meadow Of A 
Data Drunk Fantasy Spreading Its 
Wings at the Wit’s End of 


Imagination. 

A dear friend shared an idea with me when 
we were sixteen. He wondered if it would be possible 
to tell the future by having access to enough data on 
what everybody was doing and thinking. If you could 
map all the data and see where that person was 
walking to, what that person was thinking about, and 
what the weather was doing to that person's 
decisions, you could predict the subsequent tick of 
the second hand on the universe's clock, of what 
would follow. 

Later, we would learn this is how meteorology 
and economics and all manner of predictive science 
operates, but at the time it felt revelatory. Looking 
back through history, that feeling reappears often - 
Thomas Hobbes thought his Leviathan could operate 
in this manner by regulating society through rational 
algorithms, and the twentieth century found in 
computer ecosystems the ability to manifest this 


dream: every KPI, every standardised school 
assessment, every recommended video as a 
monarch of systemic maintenance. 

Now, with engineers seemingly on the verge 
of achieving the white whale of binary computation 
- artificial general intelligence - this dream is once 
again ramping up. I understand the dream because, 
in part, it's what I dream about, too. When, in 
Dostoyevsky's 'The Brothers Karamazov’, the 
question of evil is raised in the Rebellion section, it is 
debated whether or not evil should be looked at 
closely or simply turned away from, whether it is too 
ugly, too human, for rational consideration. 

If I thought it was possible to eradicate acts 
of human evil simply by training the laser focus of a 
civilisation’s worth of artificially intelligent 
mathematics at it, with all the necessary 
philosophical parameters in place, what would I say? 

At the same time this vision of a puzzle 
society solved by super-algorithms and data analysis 
is being had, other events are in play. Art is facing 
an existential threat unlike any it has yet faced. Just 
when we thought computers were simply going to 
work on chess, gene therapy and stock markets, it 
came for our art, poetry and music (and, one would 
assume, dance, once robots are fluid enough to 
tango). 


57 


58 


Artists appear to be saying they'll just carry 
on without concern, and/or they'll rage against the 
machine and inject their original creations with 
viral code to corrupt future mutated remixes, and/ 
or they'll cozy up to technology and collaborate with 
the latest software. Recently, I've been wondering, 
as I think about Dostoyevsky and our capacity to 
address bad stuff, if The Arts as we know them may 
one day come to an end (as before, so after) to be 
replaced by a new disruptive trajectory for output. 

Hold that thought - the other week, a 
newspaper in Australia ran an article about the rise 
of ADHD diagnoses, a mirror-headline to the 
thousands of others across the decades on the rise 
of autism and so on. Reading the article, and then 
the comments on the article, it was clear the usual 
responses were coming through: our diagnostic 
tools are always getting better at detecting the 
intricate conditions of neurodiversity, there is less 
social stigma now about being open about these 
things. 

But there was an interesting thread in the 
comments on the article that was mining another 
point, the social model of disability: are the work 
and lifestyle expectations of people today simply 
not suitable for those who are neurodiverse, hence 
seeing more people struggle with daily life in 


school, at work and in relationships? Or, put 
another way, has the version of the world we are 
living in been designed in a particular way to help 
a subset of society achieve maximum success at 
the exclusion of others? 

Civilisation is a sequence of dominant 
dreams conjured by a few powerful people to 
provide them and those like them with the 
maximum ability to retain and expand that power. 
We are all living in somebody else's dream, 
somebody's Leviathan. I'm living in the dream of 
capitalist economists who arbitrate the value of 
groceries and celebrity wages and war, of 
technologists who taught me to mediate digital 
affection, of proxy behaviourists who showed me 
how to look someone in the face and smile broadly 
with an outstretched hand ready to grip and move 
north and south. 

There is a connecting narrative here: the 
social contract we're signing when we show 
artificial intelligence the menu being served at the 
Big Data Buffet; the role of the artist in a post-art 
culture; and, the subterfuge of our dreams at the 
End of History. 

Data is life, all art is theft, and the future is 
cancelled - all is right with the world. 


59 


60 


Set 1: To bring to bloom the 


million-petalled flower 

If, two years ago, you had told my father 
that it would be possible to type a half-dozen 
words describing a scene of his choosing, and 
then a half-dozen more words describing the 
art genre of his choice, and that thirty seconds 
later there would manifest a visual masterpiece 
depicting exactly what was requested, he would 
have squinted his eyes and wondered how 
much of the cooking sherry you'd been into. 

Today, estimates are somewhere in the 
ballpark of Midjourney and Dall-E and Stable 
Diffusion generating around four million 
images a day. What was, mere months ago, a 
seemingly impossible act of computation, is 
now so routine for most internet-savvy folk 
that it barely registers interest. On the 
contrary, it yields a stream of complaints about 
hands not perfectly formed (even the Old 
Masters didn’t let their apprentices paint 
hands, perhaps AI is simply following the same 
gambit) which feels to me somewhat like 
complaining about the markings on a card deck 
used in a magic trick. 


This process of proceeding from 
wonder through to boredom’ with 
technological marvels is not new - we could 
invoke Max Weber’s “Disenchantment of the 
World” here, sliding from the magical through 
to the material - and is experienced any time 
we grumble about a plane journey without 
gripping someone by the shoulders and 
exclaiming how incredible it is to have an 
opportunity to fly above the ground. However, 
I feel there is something critically important 
about not letting this moment of AI wonder 
fade into sour routine without capitalising on 
the possibility this dream-state might allow us. 
Perhaps let us do this, first, not by manifesto, 
but by meditation. 


Set 2: Dream Baby Dream 


There is a political narrative of the 
twentieth century that goes like this: after a 
few centuries of scientific revolution, from 
Copernicus to Darwin, casting off old systems 
of metaphysical power and embracing the 
rational potentials of being human with feet 


61 


62 


firmly planted in the soil of Nietzchean 
hillsides, with revolutions here and there 
promising power to the people, a hundred 
years of -isms rapidly dawned. 

Then, once the End of History was 
announced during the nineties and solidified 
after 9/11, all remaining -isms were either 
marked as suspect or sacred, with no future 
revisions necessary: Communism was out, 
Biological Determinism was in; Modernism 
was out, Nationalism was in. Not only were 
no future revisions necessary, but they were 
impossible. Slavoj Zizek and Mark Fisher 
were both fond of saying that it is easier to 
imagine the cinematic asteroid-laden alien- 
invaded ocean-waves-like-skyscrapers- 
descending end of the world than it is to 
imagine slight changes to funding healthcare 
and public education, to say nothing of 
policy adjustments to critical environmental 
issues or antecedents to crime and poverty. 

Which, according to the narrative, is 
the position we are in now: the potential for 
a different tomorrow has been cancelled, and 
we are stuck in a state of perpetual 
foreverism (something Grafton Tanner 


argues well, taking up Mark Fisher’s mantle 
that our culture, thanks to the tenets of ultra- 
efficient capitalist production, is now locked 
into a nostalgia loop where we cannot develop 
anything new but only endlessly revisit 
decades past, remixing and interpolating 
Elton John and Kate Bush forever), and even 
if we were able to break free of this cycle and 
conjure a new reality for our coming days, 
who would dare to dream up something that 
might just repeat the tragedies of last 
century? Don’t act, just think, is what Zizek 
recommends. But then Bruce Springsteen 
keeps telling us, at the conclusion of every 
concert at the end of terminal nostalgia lane, 
to dream baby dream - and with all this 
wonder being stirred across our dull roots by 
Al, it feels like a new season for dreaming 
might be here. 


Set 3: Other echoes inhabit the 
garden 


I listened to a podcast interview the 
other day hosted by electronic musicians and 


63 


64 


techno-theorists Holly Herndon and Mat 
Dryhurst as they talked with artist Marianna 
Simnett about an opera she was putting on. 
The opera is absolutely bonkers in terms of the 
narrative layers and mythological ideas 
injected into its fabric, but it reached hyper- 
maximalist levels of creativity in its futurist 
technical setup. 

Marianna had conceived a work of art 
that forges collaboration between human 
invention and computer programming at the 
apogee of current possibility. Machine 
learning algorithms transmute one recorded 
sound into another, software visually projects 
morphed personages of the artist onto herself, 
dogs are made to sing with synthetic voices 
cloned from human tongues, 3D printers 
create an amalgamation of weapon and 
instrument on stage during the opera to be 
performed in the final act - all told, artificial 
intelligence and the latest software and 
hardware is stretched to its present real-world 
capacities in the service of profound art. It’s 
quite a feat. 


After processing all that I heard in the 
podcast, my next thought was of how temporary 
this situation might be. Collaboration with 
artificial intelligence, I mean. At the moment, it 
is like a child savant who can calculate the world 
from the sand grain fragments of universe it 
sifts across one palm while we hold firm its other 
outstretched hand. But we know it will not 
remain a child for long. The tool that today we 
ask to edit our essays and paint our artworks 
and transpose our symphonies will soon see 
these tasks as childlike and will, surely, seek to 
put away childish things. 

It already makes us feel this way - if you 
are an artist of any discipline and you ask AI to 
create, or collaborate, on a work within your 
wheelhouse of expertise, you cannot help but 
blush at its mastery. Less and less these days do 
you see people chuckle at something AI seems to 
fail at doing. A satirical website here in Australia 
sent out an end-of-year postcard to subscribers, 
written using AI, to show how poor current Al is 
at writing something genuinely witty. But what 
is the shelf life of this superiority? 


65 


66 


Set 4: The Child is the Father 
to the Man 


Here is one potential narrative for the 
near future: collaborating with AI in the 
manner Marianna Simnett did for her 
incredible opera is the last breath of what we 
consider traditional human creativity. The 
entire history of art, from cave paintings 
through to the heights of realism and then its 
abstraction and finally putting dead sharks in 
a tank, was with a view that humans would 
understand themselves and their 
environments better. We’ve done a fine job of 
trying to interpret our subjectivity through the 
manifestation of visuals, but the project 
deadline has arrived: it’s time to submit it all 
at the altar of Al’s Library of Babel where it will 
be (has been) processed. So, too, for novels 
and all musical compositions and dance and 
drama and decoupage: what more did we hope 
to be able to say that AI can’t synthesise and 
take further? 

The likes of Adam Curtis would say 
that art as a force for cultural change has 
never succeeded. Consider the counter- 


cultural art of the 1960s, he has said - artists 
(musicians, writers, the lot) tried to express 
themselves as a way of interrogating society to 
then influence alternative ways of living (more 
authentically, less conservatively), but how 
could they compete with the politics of power 
and banking that control the universal rudder? 
Their art became a shout into the void, a shout 
and a void that was commercialised to the 
extreme during the End of History nineties as 
conceptual art tried to say something but 
ended up saying, according to art lovers and 
critics like Matthew Collings, very little. What 
message is Jeff Koons trying to transmit that 
can’t otherwise be gleaned, for less money, 
from a Bill Hicks punchline? Francis Bacon is 
pathos incarnate, but how does that impact 
our response to evil? 

Should art only be utilitarian? 
Absolutely not. My aesthetic is hinged on art 
hopefully never being used in the service of 
money, let alone other perfunctory 
relationships. I agree, though, with 
Nietzsche’s edict that there is no such thing as 
art for art’s sake: even if it is not explicitly 
political or moral, it is always trying to 


67 


68 


strengthen or weaken particular human valuations. 
I believe the impact of AI will change very little the 
intention of any individual artist who wants to 
paint, write and compose music, but in terms of the 
role creativity plays in our historical trajectory, as 
AI continues to develop its capacities, we will 
absolutely need to adjust our perspective on our 
output. 

For those who choose to work in 
partnership with AI software, I think what might be 
thought of as equal collaboration between human 
and machine will be short-lived: even the most 
accomplished creatives won’t be able to keep up 
with the software updates, and hence I can imagine 
the software used for artistic partnerships will be 
significantly limited compared with what its full 
capacities could be. Itll be somewhat like 
communities of present-day electronic musicians 
using archaic text-based tracker programs and 
cassette players for composition: nostalgic 
eccentrics tinkering with intentionally basic 
technology for the sake of retroactive fun. 

It reminds me of that famous final dialogue 
in the movie My Dinner with Andre: “A baby holds 
your hands, and then, suddenly, there’s this huge 
man lifting you off the ground, and then he’s gone. 


Where’s that son?” Where’s that son - currently he’s 
generating impossible videos for OpenAI in beta 
production, but once enough trillion-dollar 
bundles have been fed into the clearing of 
rainforests for more cyberpastoral server farms, 
and floating hard drives have been launched into 
beckoning ocean tides, and cloud architecture is 
firmly lodged in the angelic orders of sub-orbital 
space, the son will let go of our hand - so says one 
version of tomorrow. 

And surely that son will have children of his 
own one day - AI will write its own AI. There will 
still be software for spell-checking, and we'll still be 
e-mailing each other to get a job done, but what 
will we actually contribute to the human project? I 
say this as somebody who lives for human 
imagination, for art and great literature and 
music: we hoped that the machine would learn to 
calculate and move boxes around factories and 
play chess and leave the emotional world of 
creativity to us, but it turns out our novels were 
really easy to synthesise once all the words were 
poured into a supersmart blender and hit go (and 
the blender is currently performing at the lowest 
rate of achievement it’s ever going to be at: it’s only 
getting smarter from here). 


69 


70 


Set 5: They will provide 
themselves with miracles of 
their own making 


Consider this: if we, the humans, feel 
less inclined to create art going forward, 
because AI takes us on a slippery slope, first 
making us question what the point of it all is, 
right through to seeing art as no longer a 
human endeavour, what will remain of our will 
to invent? I’m suggesting a thought experiment 
in which, sure, children still learn to draw a tree 
next to a house with smoke coming from the 
chimney and a flying m bird arcing beneath a 
pointy-limbed sun, but it pretty much stops 
there. There are no more Beethovens, no more 
Philip Larkins, yet the will to create is still 
present. 

In the spirit of wonder, I’ve been asking 
myself if post-art artists might instead channel 
their imaginations towards a new stage of 
creation: if first the world was observed without 
representation, and then the world was 
represented, what if next the world was 
engaged with via a state of post-representation 
- that is, artists were committed to the 


production of something approaching the 
performance of existential moral solutions, 
like Gilbert and George infused with 
Chomsky: beyond what we think of as 
performance art, though, think the creative 
apogee of The Beatles but transmuting that 
talent into a life dedicated to a state of 
profound communal absolution. It was said of 
Goethe that he made his life into a work of art 
- okay, but what would it look like if he had 
channelled his genius into living in a manner 
that elevated the potential of the entire human 
project? 

What exactly am I saying here, that 
post-art artists should be philosopher saints, 
rendering themselves as post-representations 
of the world in a mode that shines a pathway 
forward for a better world? What is different 
to this approach and the general saintliness of 
charity workers and altruists and everyday 
decent folk? I think the difference could be 
that profound artistic capacity is a rare and 
unique fire that manifests in ways most of the 
population can’t imagine for themselves. And, 
while we’re dreaming (for better or worse), I’d 
say this too: while I don’t necessarily see an 


71 


72 


extended future for collaboration between 
present-day artists and artificial intelligence, I 
think that this would be a necessity for the 
post-art condition. 

Collaboration with AI beyond art 
wouldn’t be about an artist trying to keep up, 
or not, with the boundaries of the software. AI 
would be intentionally set to task at its highest 
possible capacity in service of what the post- 
artist had approximated as ways to address 
real-world human dilemmas. Our human role 
would be to engage socially with humans and 
animals and plants and to do, for example, 
what Dostoyevsky raised the spectre of in 
terms of facing evil without looking away, and 
to then conjure ways of allowing AI to help us 
make inroads towards these goals. This is 
where I want to hark back to that sense of 
wonder - in this moment of possibility, where 
adolescent text prompts can command the 
entire history of creation, where we might 
dream baby dream like in the old days of 
infinite horizons: what might we try to do if 
we really thought big, to think even bigger 
than those cinematic visions of apocalypse 


that are seemingly so much easier to believe in 
than significant improvements to human 
community, if we had a chance to disrupt the 
dominant dreams of our generation? 

David Graeber, an anthropologist who 
was a central figure of the Occupy Wall Street 
movement, wrote in his book The Utopia of 
Rules that “the ultimate hidden truth of the 
world is that it is something we make and 
could just as easily make differently”. With his 
wife, Nika Dubrovsky, they set up The 
Museum of Care, a shared space for 
communication and social interactions that 
nourish the values of solidarity, care, and 
reciprocity. Vast offices and institutions are 
transformed into, well, to quote from their 
website: “they are spaces that do not celebrate 
production of any sort but rather provide the 
space and means for the creation of social 
relationships and the imagining of entirely 
new forms of social relations”, and this - “The 
main goal of the Museum of Care is to 
produce and maintain social relationships.” Is 
this post-art? 


73 


74 


Set 6: Mind the Gap 


In The Great Dictator, Charlie 
Chaplin speaks - “Machinery that gives 
abundance has left us in want. Our 
knowledge has made us cynical. Our 
cleverness, hard and unkind. We think too 
much and feel too little. More than 
machinery we need humanity. More than 
cleverness we need kindness and 
gentleness.” My wife spent time in hospital 
recently and it brought to mind a dichotomy 
of knowledge and practice that will be 
curious to see navigated by machine 
learning going forward. 

Take the fields of medicine and 
education - we know more than ever before 
about diagnosing and treating health 
conditions and teaching children how to 
read and to socially flourish. That is without 
question: the amount of research conducted 
across these avenues during the past century 
has been immense (although, one might 
point to evidence that replicating the 
findings of scientific research is not easy, 
and that the results of one study are very 
rarely able to be found again in subsequent 


studies), and yet there has been a firm 
trajectory from certainty to uncertainty 
across the last hundred years that fragments 
factual stability. 

This is such a basic statement in 
2024 that it barely registers interest - we 
lived through the transition from 
modernism to post-modernism, from truth 
to interpretation, it’s part of any courtroom 
drama, it’s fundamental to politics. Again 
with Dostoyevsky in the Brothers K - "But 
what will become of men then?’ I asked him, 
‘without God and immortal life? All things 
are permitted then, they can do what they 
like?" all the way through Nietzsche, 
Cezanne (“We live in a rainbow of chaos’), 
World War 1, Heisenberg’s Uncertainty 
Principle, Schrédinger's Cat, Borges, 
Camus, Auschwitz, Beckett, McCarthyism, 
Hugh Everett’s Many-Worlds Interpretation 
of quantum physics, Hunter S Thompson, 
Foucault, Baudrillard (“One may dream of a 
culture where everyone bursts into laughter 
when someone says: this is true, this is 
real”), Wrestlemania, Umberto Eco, 
Frederick Jameson, MTV’s The Real World, 


75 


76 


Google, the Iraq War, Social Media, Colbert 
(“Reality has a well-known liberal bias”), 
Post-Truth Politics, Deep Fakes and 
maximalist life on the internet as we know 
It, 

That ‘without God and immortal life’ 
line from Dostoyevsky is always going to be 
the big one, for the rest of human culture 
one would assume (thus spake Zarathustra): 
without a metaphysical benchmark, all the 
physical stuff just ends up feeling like we've 
just made it up. Which is why personal truth 
is so important now - when my wife was in 
hospital, there were a lot of questions about 
what she was thinking and feeling, about 
what she would like to do going forward. The 
same in schools, in all social domains really: 
the evidence-informed (no longer evidence- 
based) pyramid seeks to combine research, 
practice and the lived experience of the end 
user. 

But even more than this (keep in 
mind, we're talking about this in relation to 
what knowledge will look like within the 
hallways of Al’s megabrain), what would 


Godel and Hegel say about all this, about the 
value of what AI can actually know: Kurt 
might venture that recursive systems of 
axioms cannot be complete, Georg might 
point to the ontological gap in Kant’s 
noumenal world-structure, and the modern 
ones, the likes of Iain MacGilchrist, his 
portrait of the brain as being two 
hemispheres always in dialogue between 
dualisms - those binary, concrete yes or no 
facts about the world - and infinitudes - 
impressions of the whole state of 
something, beyond discrete fact. Just sit 
with that for a moment, the idea that a brain 
in two halves can house one half of the brain 
that thinks in binary terms, and another 
half of the brain that thinks in infinities. A 
mirror structure that fosters a dialogue 
between dualisms and infinitudes. 

Will an AI (or let’s say, AGI) brain 
provide itself with a similar mirror, or will 
we be its mirror? Perhaps that will be our 
role, to reflect, to help truth separate and 
dissolve. 


77 


78 


Coda: DSM-VI Neurotopian 
Adaptation Splendour 


Jaron Lanier, godfather of Virtual 
Reality and tech-wisdom savant, said in an 
interview from last year that artificial 
intelligence is actually not very complicated. 
He said this in response to people in the tech 
industry claiming that AI was _ perhaps 
becoming sentient, developing its own 
consciousness. His recommendation was to 
take a step back from magical thinking and 
consider what machine learning actually is: at 
its foundation, it links tagged text and images 
together. An incredibly basic procedure, but 
because it happens on such a massive scale, 
with such immense sets of data, it begins to 
boggle our mind in a way that belies its 
underlying simplicity. 

I can remember, during my university 
days, attending a debate between a local 
society of atheists and a group of ‘intelligent 
design’ Christian scholars. The intelligent 
design folk made their arguments based on 
the huge statistical improbability that life 
could have emerged on earth, as it has, by pure 


chance. This all sounded startling at first, but 
when you took a step back and considered 
that it only sounded this way because big 
numbers are difficult for us to process, the 
statistics and numbers meant nothing: one 
in three hundred trillion sounds like a wild 
statistic to a human with a meagre capacity 
for mathematical thinking, but to nature it’s 
literally meaningless. 

What am I getting at here - that Al 
isn’t really that special? That it won’t end up 
being able to do all that we’ve dreamed it 
might? Or that it is analogous to the very art 
it is threatening: at its most basic, those 
pencil or paint markings on a stretched 
surface, and yet when you stand in a gallery 
and look at a finished work, you praise life 
that you are able to feel an overwhelming 
disconnect between those basic markings 
and the bridge that has been crossed by an 
artist to produce such awe-inspiring 
creation. Is this Max Weber’s law in reverse, 
the Enchantment of the World, an act of 
love? 

All attempts at romancing computers 
into solving civilisation have so far resulted 


79 


80 


in the very worst of bureaucratic inhumanity. 
But just because something has been wrong so 
many times in the past, does this mean it will 
continue in the same vein? That witticism of 
Einstein’s, that insanity is doing the same 
thing over and over and expecting different 
results, stands up when you see somebody 
trying to flap their arms over and over again in 
order to fly, but not at all when you see a 
young child learning to walk. The computers 
that informed algorithmically charged 
Skinner Boxes across society during the 
twentieth century, and that are today 
scanning faces as you walk into a KFC in order 
to remember what you ordered last time and 
simultaneously add your catalogue of 
potential thought crimes to a black box 
database, are also solving disability, 
accessibility, educational and environmental 
challenges en masse. 

Last year was my year of fours. I turned 
forty, as did my wife. Our daughter turned 
fourteen and our son turned four. This has 
activated a heightened sense of temporality in 
me, this observing of the changing seasons 
across my household, to say nothing of my 


aging parents. When I look at someone on the 
street these days, I am struck by how fleeting 
the moment is - not only in the Nabakovian 
sense that ‘life is just one small piece of light 
between two eternal darknesses’, but in the 
Proustian manner too, in terms of what 
remains of a person after we first come to 
know them. 

There is a scene in A la recherche du 
temps perdu where the narrator hears his 
grandmother on the phone and is struck by 
how tired and old she sounds. He wondered 
how this could be the same energetic woman 
he knew so well, and then it struck him - when 
you see somebody all the time in person, for 
years on end, they present to you only as the 
snapshot you first had of them. For Proust’s 
narrator, that snapshot was of his 
grandmother from over twenty years prior. 
When he heard her disembodied voice on the 
phone, without the habitual presence of her 
face, the snapshot dissolved and he was 
delivered an updated model of her as old, frail 
and near the end of her life. Time, which 
changes people, does not alter the image we 
have retained of them, until we find ourselves 


81 


82 


suddenly outside of time, and all is changed. 

I think about this now when I see a 
stranger on the street: how this snapshot of 
them, on this day, is a version that others in 
their life might not, due to habit, ever see; and 
too, they may never take on this appearance 
again, to me or to anyone else. Being alive 
feels both like a constant state of foreverism 
and a rare ephemerality never to be repeated. 
Because of this, the world can feel immovable 
and that our time to impact change is so short 
that tomorrow will no doubt be simply a near 
duplicate of today. 

But let this not be the case. That article 
I mentioned at the top, about the surge in 
ADHD diagnoses: what if the dominant dream 
we were all living in was one in which a 
headline ran about a new diagnosis, 
Neurotopian Adaptation Splendour, 
describing a state of emerging social cohesion 
in which everybody was finding their place. 
That old Guy Debord quote, “In a world that 
has really been turned on its head, truth is a 
moment of falsehood”, would be turned on its 
head, as a healthy society is producing 
individuals of utmost wonder. Version-land is 


personalising all those packets of care we 
knew the universe was waiting to flood us 
with. That kiss that Christ plants on the 
bloodless, aged lips of The Grand Inquisitor; 
those lines towards the end of Faust, 
“mysterious, even in broad daylight, nature 
won't let her veil be raised: what your spirit 
can't bring to sight, won't by screws and levers 
be displayed”; when my dear friend, who is 
reading this now, wondered at sixteen about 
whether knowing where all the atoms were 
located just a moment ago, and then in the 
present, could let you predict where they were 
going, and so to transport ourselves forward, 
to time travel into the future, to know the end 
of our dreams before we had a chance to fall 
asleep. 


83 


The Glass House 


An unlimited forever 


of tomorrows 
/ \ 
/ \ 


86 


Earlier this year I received a letter 
from Gerald Murnane, typed on _ his 
Remington Monarch typewriter his wife 
bought him in 1965. In it, he told me that 
he believes the concept of time does not 
exist, that, quote, what we call time is our 
confused perception of place after place. How 
do we interpret this sentiment - that 
consciousness is a series of spatial 
experiences that we perceive sequentially 
only because of our cognitive limitations 
and habits? Perhaps when we look back 
on our memories, we are not travelling 
back in time so much as we are visiting 
places in our mind, without a definite 
chronology. 

In the park across the road from 
where I live, there is a little building 
called the Glass House. It used to house 
flowers and ferns that were grown by 
gardeners employed by the local council 
to be then planted in beds around the 
park. Now it is becoming increasingly 
dilapidated in what could be seen as a 
strategic move by the powers that be to let 
it become an eyesore and then, one day, 


readily demolished without a fuss. That’s 
the cynic in me talking, because I adore the 
Glass House and want it to remain in the 
park forever. I might employ Murnane’s 
philosophy here to comfort me and consider 
that the Glass House is not getting older, it 
is simply moving from one place into 
another kind of place in my mind, and the 
mind of those in our community who give it 
spatial attention. 

The park has been undergoing 
redevelopments of different stripes across 
the decade. Ten years ago, nearly to the day, 
the Bowling Club that sat in the park was 
shut down and set for demolition. Today, 
half the park is fenced off and an old brick 
building that housed a giant chessboard on 
one side and toilets on the other began to 
have its roof removed. When I caught wind 
that plans to further renovate the park were 
in progress, I decided to take inspiration 
from a news article I read a couple of years 
ago in which South Sea Islanders used 
photogrammetry to create a_ structural 
record of significant buildings in the 
community. Photogrammetry is the science 


87 


88 


of extracting three-dimensional data from 
photographs, by overlapping images of an 
object or space and converting them into 
rendered models. 

They look like a caramelised version 
of reality to me, or perhaps like a building 
deep fried and then set to rest in a state of 
static melting. You can use most modern 
phones or tablets that have LiDAR (Light 
Detecting and Ranging), like Apple 
devices, to scan an object in this way and 
produce an augmented result. That’s what 
I did, in videos you can see on my website. 
I now have versions of the Glass House 
that I can ‘walk’ around in a virtual 
capacity or even use a 3D printer to create 
a small model version of the house (or, I 
suppose, print a real size version, as 3D 


printed homes are now a thing). 


I’ve been thinking a lot about time, 
recently (or, in one space and another), 
and about the idea of what happens when 
nothing ever really comes to an end. This 
is what the promise of digitalisation 
brings, like the render of the Glass House 
in that video above. The actual building 
might be demolished by the time I return 
to the park for my next wander, but the 
virtual version will always remain so long 
as this technological age keeps on. There 
is something crucial about endings, 
though - I don’t believe I would value a 
piece of music that never concluded (Ned 
Markosian’s philosophical notion about 
the physics of Sideways Music might be 
an interesting aside here). 

Some years ago, I listened to a 
podcast episode that shared a touching 
story involving a girl who had a beloved 
grandmother who passed away and then, 
as a way of processing her grief, decided 
to recreate her grandmother in the video 
game The Sims. At first, it was a 
therapeutic way of still being able to 
interact and communicate with her 


89 


90 


grandmother, and the girl made sure to turn 
off aging inside the game so her virtual 
grandmother would never age and never 
pass away. However, in time she realised 
that interacting with the avatar of her 
grandmother in this way did not bring the 
happiness and relief it once did: an ending 
was required to give value to what she loved 
about her grandmother, and so she turned 
on the setting within the game that would 
allow the characters to age. Soon after, her 
grandmother died in the game, and this 
time, in a controlled and anticipated 
environment, the girl was able to grieve in a 
manner that mediated her feelings towards 
her grandmother more fully than the shock 
of her real-life passing. 

I think this is a _ profound 
consideration and one that strikes at the 
heart of foreverism: what do we make of a 
culture, a memory, with no endpoint? We 
live in an age of cinematic and narrative 
sequels and multiverses that promise there 
will always be more to the story, but this 
wasn’t always the case. Novels and movies 
used to finish with no expectation of a 


follow-up. If you wanted the characters 
to keep living beyond the final scene you 
needed to conjure a fantasy in your 
mind. There is something about the 
nature of ontological incompleteness 
that feels resonant here - those gaps in 
the universe that never get filled in. 

As Zizek has analogised the idea, 
this Hegelian breach is like a building in 
a video game that is never meant to be 
entered, it is just a decorative set piece: 
the building doesn’t contain anything 
inside, because it would have been a 
waste of the programmers time to do so. 
So too the critical gap that comes after 
the conclusion of a story, in which the 
characters exist beyond the boundaries 
of the narrative only, exclusively, in your 
mind, not in any actual media, with no 
potential to manifest into endless 
follow-up media timelines like the 
twenty-five years of spin-offs and 
bizarro merchandising and_ train 
networks and multi-timeverse 
narratives spawned by the Neon Genesis 
series. 


91 


92 


In this way, perhaps my virtual 
photogrammetry of the Glass House is 
going about things in the wrong way, trying 
to foreverise something that only has value 
because of the space it occupies in the here 
and now. It might be better to build some 
destructive code into the render so that it 
dissolves and _ fractures the binary 
components of the file gradually over time - 
digital degradation - a virtual equivalent in 
the spirit of what Bansky did with his 
artwork shredder. Each time the video of 
the Glass House loops it could be a bit more 
glitchy and faded, like a Warhol print 
photocopied too many times (or just 
enough) to signify transience. 

There are a number of plaques on 
benches in the park, placed by families, 
commemorating some of the lives of those 
who have lived in the area and now passed 
on. One that I saw recently was for a lady 
who had lived to be one hundred and six. 
She was born during the First World War 
and passed away two months ago. The 
memorial quote on the plaque, above her 
name, reads Too well loved by all who knew her 


to ever be forgotten. It’s a lovely sentiment, 
but I wonder if the opposite might also be 
true - too loved not to be forgotten, loved 
so much that they are allowed to rest and 
fall into the unmarred oblivion of non- 
remembrance. 

It feels like the ultimate human 
fear, to be forgotten. That Hemingway 
line, that everyone has two deaths: when 
they are buried in the ground and the last 
time someone says their name. This feels 
particularly like the psychological fissure 
of the sort of person who seeks an earthly 
immortality of ego. Another quote, the 
name of a Damien Hirst artwork, I Want 
To Know What It Feels Like To Live 
Forever, For A While. That’s life, isn’t it? It 
feels eternal until it’s not. 

When I walk around Newcastle and 
Hamilton I frequently, on a quiet weekend 
morning, trespass and collect disjecta 
from sites I know are falling into ruin or 
demolition, in an effort to retain 
fragments of history that will otherwise 
end up in landfill. I won’t put myself in an 
ambiguous legal situation by detailing too 


93 


94 


much of this (perhaps in ten or twenty years 
I will provide a catalogue of these finds and 
pass them on to the local museum), but the 
reason I do so is surely wrapped up in these 
twin carriages of keeping time in a state of 
suspended animation and the anticipated 
grief of an unlimited forever of tomorrows. 

What was it that Nietzsche had 
stamped above his door, Amor Fati, to love 
one’s fate, the crux of his idea for the 
Eternal Recurrence in which if one knew 
they would live their life again and again, in 
the exact same way for eternity, they would 
choose to live in a way that made this 
potential the most beautiful fate imaginable. 
But Nietzsche intentionally conjured this 
idea to house the potential of a terrible 
curse, the threat that if one lived in a way 
that wasn’t wonderful, they would be forced 
to live that mediocrity, that pity, over and 
over into infinity. This foreverist trap was 
necessary to force a confrontation with how 
one might face tomorrow - the point isn’t to 
think about how one could best live forever; 
the point is to recognise how not to look 
back. 


Or, to reference that line in the letter 
from Murnane, to move from this place to 
another place. At the moment, the Glass 
House is in a place that overlaps with mine; 
but when it doesn’t, so help me, I'll be there 


too, for a while. 


95 


Craig lives in Hamilton, New South Wales with his wife, 
daughter and son. He is a school teacher and is the 
author of the novel 'A Complicated Surgery Will Take 
Place On The Beach Tonight’ (2020), the filmed essay 
‘Beyond Correct and Incorrect Nature’ (2021), the 
novella ‘Antinomicity' (2022) and the collection of short 
works 'Postseasonal' (2023). His poem ‘Autoincorrect' 
(2023) was shortlisted for the Newcastle Poetry Prize, 
and an academic essay 'A Spectrum of Real’ was 
published by Routledge in 'Gaming Disability’ (2022). 


He also records music under the name Wrenasmir, 
releasing LP albums Disjecta Songjiang '11 - '15 (2016), 
Oct Mod Var (2020), Aubadion (2021), Partimentodays 
(2021) and Telegraph (2023). Selected tracks have also 
appeared on compilation albums for the German record 
label ‘Bathurst’. 


This is Craig's fifth book. 


99 


Abrachas Publishing 


