Pastoral Scanlines 
Selected Works '20 - '25 


Craig Warren Smith 


Copyright © Craig Warren Smith. 
All rights reserved. 


The moral rights of the author have, 
to a cursory extent, been somewhat asserted. 


Cover illustrations by Teresa Smith. 
www.wrenasmir.com 


2025 


Abrachas Publishing 


pos: Gomes 
%1,”-.1 
\[/# ~*~ v__,= 


\r | m’, : 
Ja i/ 
jim 


? | 


»{$@&) >\ 


Then he grew calmer, and the vessel was carried 
on and reached Newcastle. 
- Patrick White, Voss 


101 


105 


159 


161 


173 


185 


187 


197 


Contents 
Preface 
Untitled 
Autoincorrect 
Saltando 
Garden Monologue #2 
Ambient 1-4 
Peoplehood 
Gnomon 
Fellow Disjecta, Oh Sunny Danger Time 
She Believes Antique Logs Take Flight 
Leaving / Leading 
Garden Monologue #1 
The Wind Bucket 


A Billiard Table with Five Balls 
and Twelve Cues 


Carnival 


201 


211 


213 


227 


237 


255 


275 


283 


287 


293 


303 


317 


329 


333 


347 


Postseasonal 
Aborealish 
Prompt 
Selector 
Obfuscation 
Pugil 


Nature as Landscape 
(from 'Antinomicity’) 


Based On Your Viewing History 
His Is A Quiet Carriage 
Bundlebloom 

Protection: PS Part 1 

Sandsynce: PS Part II 

The Body Of This Story 

Hesse 


To Weave, To Fabricate 


349 


375 


395 


409 


439 


441 


465 


Sovereignty is an Artificial Soul 
A Parallax of Tensor Sharding 
Beyond Correct and Incorrect Nature 


Scenes (from 'A Complicated Surgery 
Will Take Place On The Beach Tonight’) 


Just Talking About Pies 
Not Dry 


Ember Rim 


Preface: 
Landscape Within Landscape 


Thought has a feeling. It carves out 
negative space from the dust of consciousness that 
blooms on the stage behind our eyes. It manifests 
as a shape that expands, contorts and becomes 
landscape within our internal empire. To think is 
to be a cartographer of a mental geography that 
mirrors the panorama of daylit trajectories we 
navigate across our waking lives. 

This is thought as both topography and 
topology. There is no more accurate phenomenology 
of the experience of thinking for me than 
recognising the feeling of spherical rubber, made 
from soft light, fold into a torus in the middle of 
my head, stretching out and doubling back on 
itself as a cross surface that becomes a city on one 
side and a pastoral sheet of memories that rapidly 
reel back in and become thoughts the size of five- 
cent coins, and then a bus, and then a hill that 
becomes a declivity into darkness as my thinking 
stops and some background buffering gives time 
for the shape to reform, a node facing due north in 
the medically designated centre of my mind. 


As a child I can remember the feeling of 
sitting in my bedroom, closing my eyes and having 
thoughts - I used to think about walking along 
telegraph wires during sunset - that had a physical 
resonance to them. The thoughts felt like the 
inside of my head was a balloon expanding and 
filling up the room. Then, the thought would shift - 
a memory would enter, or I would plan a game - 
and the feeling of thought would become like a 
plate in some midground space between my nose 
and my shoulders. 

In my early thirties, I would tell my wife, ‘I 
need to start the day by walking through the city, 
to feel my thoughts fill the streets’, which I would 
suggest is a similar sensation for anybody who 
feels cramped up in their house and needs to get 
outside to see the sky, or for those who live near 
the ocean and are able to stand in front of it and 
feel a sense of expansive potential. The link 
between physical landscapes and thought is as old 
as poetry - likely, the birth of poetry - as ideas were 
linked with clouds (now, more than ever, since this 
is where our digital brains live), stories with rivers, 
accomplishments and challenges with mountains, 
freedom with flight (above cities, above fields). 

The use of metaphor to reflect the 
subjective human experience against the curtain 
of nature’s stage is not, to my mind, a curious path 
that our linguistics developed. I’d suggest it is the 
very material of thought, this sublimation of mind 


and matter, one into the other, subject as object, 
that gives form to consciousness: this is the feeling 
of thought, an internal architecture of meaning, of 
light, that occupies a geography in our heads 
reflective of the shapes, colours and textures we 
see around us. It is a synaesthetic sensation in so 
far as it mirrors the forms we are capable of 
feeling. 

When we think about thinking, we often 
focus on content rather than form. But what if the 
shape of thought - its volume, texture, spatial 
dimensions - is just as present as what we're 
thinking about? What if a thought about 
mathematics isn't just thematically different from 
a thought about love but structurally and 
ontologically distinct? While I am on a walk and 
think about a friend's face, I have a rubber battery 
shape in my mind that flattens out slowly like a 
petal becoming warm. Then, it becomes a wide 
tent structure at the same instant I conjure their 
voice and remember a funny joke they told as a 
teenager. I do not see the tent; I feel it in my mind. 
It feels like the relief of a tent, the physical echo of 
a shape within the dark mesh space of no vision 
(closed eyes). 

Philosopher David Pitt published a book 
last year called The Quality of Thought. In it, he 
makes a case for the phenomenology of thought in 
a way that seems true to me - thought has a 
feeling; it is not just a frictionless stream of symbols 


and language and semi-transparent images that 
glide on without a broader, describable 
experiential quality. There is a viscerality to 
thought that gives flesh to idealism. 

Friedrich Nietzsche described thoughts' 
impact on him, within him, as a train passing by 
and rattling the windows of his interior. Thoughts 
were always physical for Nietzsche - ‘I am affected 
by my thoughts as others are by their passions... a 
thought, even a possibility, can shatter me; my 
courage arises in the freshness of my thought; my 
vitality pours into me with my blood; even my 
muscles celebrate a feast’. 

When Australian author Gerald Murnane 
reads Thomas Hardy, he reads the description 
Hardy has penned of a hill. Then, he wonders what 
lies behind that hill - not in an imagined sense, of 
some fanciful daydream of a fictional township or 
a field shadowed by cloud cover that might exist 
behind the hill in Hardy’s story, but rather where is 
that hill within the mental geography of 
Murnane’s subjectivity, and where does it exist in 
relation to the other hills Murnane has read or 
thought about: this is memory not as chronology 
but as space. 

In a letter Murnane wrote me last year, he 
said ‘what we call time is our confused perception 
of place after place’. When I think about what lies 
behind Hardy’s hill, I feel my thoughts hollow out a 
riverbank in some coordinate some ten or twenty 


kilometres behind a field W G Sebald once 
described a manor house occupying. I can travel 
from one to the next, or rather, there is a felt 
mental shape that carries the distance. 

The Glass Bead Game by Hermann Hesse 
describes a competitive academic sport played 
between two people who face each other and 
conjure analogies. One player will bring up a 
phrase of music, and the other will find a 
relationship between the shape of the passage - a 
geometric pathway of counterpoint fifths in a 
Toccata by Bach - with the antithetical steps 
between historical periods exemplifying a theory 
of Hegel’s. A harmonious connection is made and 
is witnessed by the audience physically - the glass 
beads are tokens that represent the shape of 
thoughts; they illuminate the symbolic 
connections and the aesthetic feelings rendered. 
The act of thinking is explicitly experienced, and 
its beauty and complexity are what preserve 
human culture. 

I've never seen the cognitive computer 
scientist Douglas Hofstadter reference Hermann 
Hesse, but it feels to me that Hofstadter’s central 
linguistic tenet - that all thoughts are analogies, 
that they can only exist as analogy, that the core 
property of any idea, any mental state, is one of 
analogy, of relationship, of mirroring - is a 
reasoned explication of Hesse’s game. So too of 
Murnane’s notion of ‘place after place’ - or, rather, 


‘this place and its relationship with this other 
place’. Mental landscape as an analogy of our sense 
of the external world, one shaping the other. 
Behind Hardy's hill is an analogy of a rise once 
traversed as a young one holding the hand of a 
parent during some infinite afternoon not in the 
past, but of a place. 

If a feeling of thinking is a geography of 
geometries shaping and reshaping inside our 
head, then the landscapes manifested are not a 
sign of intellectual capacity. Unlike other models 
of thought or intelligence, my approximation here 
is that a mental landscape of the interior would be 
experienced in an equal quality of range and shape 
across a variety of minds in the true sense of 
neurodiversity. A child would not experience a 
diminished plane of small thinking - their 
landscape would be as rich and bountiful as any 
adult who values the breadth and depth of their 
capacity to think. An individual who has sustained 
a traumatic brain injury would not furnish a 
topography with less peaks and valleys than a 
university professor lecturing on James Joyce, but 
rather the shapes and motions of their mental map 
would reach as far into the distance as any other 
mind, and as intimately curated to local 
fascinations of a nature that is not measurable on 
assessments or scales. 

From this perspective, I look into the eyes 
of a baby and see not a mind waiting to grow and 


unfurl in a scaffold of academic mastery but a 
landscape already present with kilometre-wide 
smiles from parents and loved ones, the shape of 
the call of baby’s name transfiguring the scale of a 
musical motif first played down a laneway of 
yesterday and tomorrow, orienting itself to the 
potentials of a map not growing bigger by the day, 
or more accurate or populated with a greater 
density of thoughts, but a map _ inherently 
complete, reflecting the fully formed analogy of 
self. 

What is the Kantian interface here, 
between the external trajectories of the world that 
our internal geography is mirrored against, and 
the manner in which the shape of our mental 
topography influences the attention we pay to the 
physical world, reconfiguring its orientation based 
on the movement of our interior? How much does 
the media landscape around us, the paradigms of 
the age, the menu of videos and spreadsheets we 
feed ourselves, impact the geometry we feel in our 
thoughts? Yes, we are born with an internal 
landscape of inherent quality, but how is it 
restructured by external forces into shapes that 
work for and against the capacity of our thoughts 
to travel? 

After a day of emails, the shapes in my 
head are not swift and flourishing - they are flat 
and barely tangible, barely a shadow felt. Put me 
amongst the morning streets, holding a soft hand 


in mine, listening to the roof of the world rub 
against space and resonate a harmonic spread - 
now my mind is becoming expansive again. Wide 
sheets that flap out like a flag, becoming droplets 
that fractal and hold, a sense of shelves levitating 
and becoming bird-like. The medium is the 
message of the topology of the topography. 

When inventor Jaron Lanier first 
experimented with a virtual reality application 
involving a character walking around a town, there 
was a glitch whereby the hand of the body of the 
character grew too big, to the size of a football 
field. This, for him, was the real dawn of possibility 
for how technology could reimagine the 
proprioception of the human form - what is better, 
a virtual reality that mirrors the physical world, or 
one that distorts a strategic fragment of it to kick 
open the doors of perception? 

This is the challenge that is visited upon us 
by artificial intelligence, too: how will interacting 
with a mirror, an analogy, of our human cognition, 
expand or contract our mental landscape? Having 
Al write poetry for us through the flat reduction of 
glass we slink our heads towards in the artificial 
light of some anonymous mid-morning is not 
going to fuel new geometries behind our eyes, but 
rather it'll cement our reductions. However, if the 
posture of our dialogue with ambient computing 
can spin an interaction with AI into new 
opportunities for executive functioning, new 


creative trajectories not previously considered, 
then the map will continue to stay true to the 
inherent malleability of neurodiversity we came 
packaged with. 

At the end of the day, I look forward to 
reclining on my bed, closing my eyes and choosing 
from a playlist of thoughts to sequence through. 
No visual stimulation, no auditory accompaniment 
other than the ambience of the world. I have a 
couple of thought playlists written out on a pad 
that I think through - here is one of them: 


1. Walking through a multistory carpark with 
my wife some decade ago, looking over the 
city of Newcastle, the spires of the cathedral, 
the flat rooftops with party lights strung 
across clotheslines. 


2. Eating at a table somewhere in holiday 
Queensland, at seven years of age, at what 
may have been Grundy’ Entertainment 
Centre, hearing music and seeing a digital 
video loop for a television production 
company against a black starfield. 


3. Looking out the ice-laced windows of a 
hotel room in the early morning, during the 
middle of winter, five years ago, as a train 
carrying logs made its way through a weave 
of chimney smoke through a town in Tasmania. 


4. Eating Spanish food some time ago with a 
mate down on the Central Coast, thinking 
about the topics we covered that night, how I 
wrote them down later that evening and into 
the early morning to fashion some prose. 


5. As a teenager, sitting in my bedroom with 
fifty tabs open on an internet browser, after 
having downloaded a Bomberman game 
emulation from a Warez site, as two friends 
arrive on their bikes to catch up and see 
what's happening. 


6. Recently, climbing the rocky ridgeline of 
beachscape and shale from Bar Beach to the 
Bogey Hole, swimming partway there, 
reclining on a rock near where a cormorant 
had settled, becoming one with the sun and 
stone. 


Six is enough - that can take a good hour 


to strobe through. The written playlist next to my 


bed is much simpler: Carpark with T, Grundy’s, 
Winter Train, Los Dos Hombres, Bomberman, 
Beach. That is enough to trigger the sequence of 
thoughts that I visualise and think through, but 
the emphasis is less on the internal cinema of my 


mind - this is critically important - and much 


more, overwhelmingly more, on the feel of the 


10 


thoughts as I bring the memories to mind. These 
are the shapes that form, the feeling of some 
internal movement of shadow, lightly pressed, of a 
gradient of tone that stretches sideways, becomes 
a circle, a balloon, a head within a head, an analogy 
of a place. 

There is an ethical imperative here, I’m 
sure of it - for me, I want to preserve this feeling of 
thought, this attention and awareness of a quality 
of thought that may be quite different to yours, or 
it may resonate, or signal some other synaesthetic 
token of internal cognition, the composition of 
your own Glass Bead Game. Thought has forever 
been the most invisible part of our ontology, and 
now that we occupy a world of images and an 
abundance of language that can make our own 
linguistics feel minor beneath the acres of data 
storage units filling up every second, I am driven 
to once again turn inward, to look beneath the 
broadcast of information cast along telegraph 
lines and motorways into the cartography of 
avenues hewn from the centre of the mind 
outward, the irreplaceable shapes, the pressure 
applied to a gap that has travelled with you all this 
way. Spherical rubber, soft light, place after place 
after place. 


Il 


12 


Untitled 


Numbers stations cast windborne over dry 
yellow fields to our hamlet, some thousand even 
footfalls at the grill where I meet Pleur while 
bovine tracking - she waves and asks if I know how 
to till by hand, yes and then it is lemonade at the 
invisible estate on the hill and dot matrix wheat 
joysticks and a history of sunburn and some 
handful of foggily sequenced politics. 

I only meet Leif some weeks later. 

And then Varva. 


13 


14 


Pleur had botany genus back to the Rum 
Rebellion, allowing me to identify plant life-history 
data in the fire regime of the local woodlands. 
Everything was copper glazed, mushroom bounced. 

At first it was rows, then columns. Seeding 
the dust with batteries, what Pleur refers to as 
keys, she transfers money to cover my time. 

The house is tall as her mouth is wide, half 
the distance of age cast shadows from ripples on 
the pond where she and Varva float topless in a 
terracotta rowboat and absorb everything from the 
Karman line down to their paramourted ease. 

When eventually I meet Leif he does not 
meet me. He sits on a bench facing mine beneath a 
lattice canopy and talks only to Pleur about the 
gaps around the crops. Pleur responds only with 
reference to Varva who I have not seen yet but who 
Leif seems to make manifest by drawing an outline 
of her with his finger in the hot air as he searches 
for the right word, settling on none. 


There are times I walk away when Leif 
appears, as my job is in the fields and not beneath 
the canopy, and when I look back I see Pleur 
gazing at my position while Leif remotely shapes 
his lips into a broadcast pattern of wanton cardiac 
elegy. 

It is Varva who Leif dissuades notification 
when he eventually does address me, asking about 
my family, how long in the valley, before and or 
after the rapture, generations where he has seen 
only minor days. 

The appleshine afternoon when Varva 
swiftly footfalls between barn and house before us 
and is stopped by Leif out of, at the time, 
seemingly unfounded obligation, he shares with 
me her name and asks she not do mathematics in 
my presence, although not in those words. 

What he does say, I have it written down 
exactly, is that Varva should speak Australian. 


16 


Autoincorrect 


Let’s go, she said, on a date 
where we won't contribute 

to a large language model of data. 
Well, how could I refuse. 


She pushed a graphite etched note 

across the table and asked 

that I wait to unfold it until I am within 

the confines of the corrugated iron toolshed 
in the back of my garden, she confirmed 

via satellite photograph that it is a safe space 
in terms of drones being unable to read 
through the roofing panels. 


We've known each other five months. 
She’s a computer scientist and I’m not. 
We met at a talk on robotic bees 

newly built to not so much teach 

but rather encourage real bees 

to pollinate more efficiently. 


II 


Her work and the way she lives 
is focused on keeping chat bots 
in a state of perpetual hallucination. 


Here is an example: you ask 

the computer what year the 

Sydney Harbour Bridge was last rotated 
in accordance with industrial protocols 
that require the span be turned twice 
each decade, and the computer will say 
March 2021. It can’t admit ignorance 

so it hallucinates a logic wrought reality. 


18 


III 


No surveillance, that’s one of 

the rules for our date. No cameras 
on poles (black plums, skin rubbed 
sheer where the eye peers through) 
and speaking of fruit no groceries 
either, those sensors that track your 
gaze across the shelves — not good. 


Phones will be left at home and we'll 
use cash only and we should wait 
until its overcast so clouds blanket our 
footfalls. She says we should cross 

the road at random intervals, go from 
one side of the street to the other 

so our behaviours aren’t predictable. 


19 


IV 


If the scraping of our personal data 
whilst we are holding hands or similar 
is unavoidable, as it so often is, she 
encourages obfuscation. 


She learned this from a research paper, 
you actively volunteer meaningless 
strings of junk information en masse so 
the receiving software learns nothing. 


She said I could just talk as I normally do 
and that should be fine, but she might 
chat like the wings of a moth, camouflage 
her words with layers of banality, like 
what happens to the family name Smith if 
you try to locate them in a phone book. 


20 


V 


Ethically I don’t know if I should describe 

what she is wearing lest a portrait emerges 
of her aesthetic references and even brand 
names that could build an image catalogue 


that profiles her essence. 

Perhaps I could describe all that she is not 
wearing on our date (pleather, lemonade felt) 
so enough negative space remains, a relief 


of her presence (withdraw fish bowl earrings) 


to see who is left behind. 


21 


VI 


You might think this level of care 
should apply to this poem - why go 
to so much trouble to enjoy a date 
completely off the record, a meeting 
palimpsest scored blank, only to 
then map out the architecture of the 
whole endeavour. 


To which I would respond that, while 

I appreciate the compliment, to 

think it is within my capacity to truly 
know what is happening around 

me at any given time, and to accurately 
take note of this — it’s not the case. 


This is really what we don’t want computers to learn: 
how to not know, how to be eternally uncertain, how 
to be full of ontological gaps. That’s the secret sauce. 


22 


VII 


She likes it when I hum copyright free 
melodies (I don’t tell her they borrow 
substantially from Metallica and Bjork, 
I’m just waiting for the right moment) 


and she hates the idea that a computer would 
ever be able to do the same, which they can, 

she knows this, she attended a concert of bee 
music orchestrated by algorithm, a thousand 
mechanical wings fluttering in tuned resonance 
(this night changed her, she didn’t even mean 
to go, she was looking for a Beethoven playlist 
and got so far as typing ‘Bee’ and autocorrect 
predicted: well, if you like bees, you'll love this). 


23 


VIII 


I guide her head beneath a metal crossbeam 
hanging between loose wires and an empty 
elevator shaft. It is midday in the holoscene. 


This carpark was in a state of redevelopment 
but then it stopped. A vegetable garden on 
Level 6 used to be cared for by an education 
centre on the ground floor, but they’re gone. 


Nobody saw us enter. We are echo’s ghosts. 

I don’t worry so much about chat bots writing 
poems like this one, or that they'll improve 
the form, because we got here first. Like this 
little golden patch of clean light we sit in to 


share an orange, and smile, and kiss — 


Whatever follows, remember we got here first. 


24 


25 


26 


Saltando 


Bare footfalls press alternating stamps 
into weightless runs of sand. Lightsole crumbles 
turn shale as the view bends east, arcing out of 
civilisation's reach where broad stone platforms 
honeycomb a thousand liquid mirrors, each a 
garden of crab scramble and urchin pocket 
beneath hollowed lean of (world towering on 
world, soaring) rockfaced ternary lines - a coal 
stave at intervals root, third and fifth, each metre 
ten vertical centuries of accreted particles, reverse 
disintegration blooming dark scanlines against 
Leifs view. He blinks ocean spray and sees again 
what he saw of her not ten minutes ago, startled by 
the ease of her familiarity. 

She remembered him, somehow, from last 
week, in the dark: the fanning of her dress like an 
umbrella, like the mosaic petals of a night- 
blooming datura (Angel’s Trumpet) as she 
revolutioned to a raw drum and bass loop left on 
repeat on the unattended decks at the street fair, 
and then so unlike him - he thinks about this while 
ambling up a rise of pebbles that swell like a buried 
heartbeat into boulderish slabs - fingers reaching 
towards the keys of a 1977 Rhodes MK1 stage piano, 
he couldn’t help it, jamming out a syncopated 
paradiddle of double octaves and borrowed 


27 


melodic hooks that she smiled at, at him, teeth and 
gums, until a crowd gathered and he got shy. 

Foam spray pearled and scattered on Leif’s 
shins, a dusting of cold, shattered sea lace, a quick 
outbreath of ocean piped up between rock 
declivities, as he plays out the muscle memory of 
his fingers retreating from the keys, again he 
reaches into the air and sees them subtract. Katita, 
she introduced herself after, told him how 
wonderful his playing was, with the same smile 
she had just now on the beach, she waved him out 
of his thoughts (twisting the water free from her 
hair). Leif recognised her and could tell with only 
the faintest peripheral gaze, with his eyes locked 
into hers, that she was wearing only bikini 
bottoms. 

A cormorant against the sun, light- 
drinking pinions the colour of silence, basks on a 
shelf out of Leifs reach. Water drops from here to 
the foot of a cave beneath the overhang, but what 
could be above, behind the lip of the bird’s perch - 
a stone bowl penthouse where coralyn salties and 
naiads bathe while practising their harmonies 
(their Hanon scales), a volcanic mouth sealed with 
tank traps from the breakwater beneath the fort, a 
naturally formed ocarina that blows and resonates 
a choral hum woven with tones of every available 
human who chooses not to speak out of reverence 
for an anticipated soundtrack of grace to 
accompany a slideshow of limitless war, a simple 
lookout, a stage. 


28 


Leif wasn’t sure if he sensed any 
embarrassment from Katita in her state of undress 
or whether it was all on his side, his standard self- 
consciousness pouring forth, for she surely held 
her composure well, with a measured pride even. 
He only took his eyes from hers to look out at the 
sea and then directly back to the pools beneath her 
brows. It’s okay, she smiled, relax, you can look, 
and he didn’t want to be rude, so he looked down 
and then back up and turned beet red, goofy grin. 
Katita’s friend called out from a picnic towel 
encampment, they were meeting some guys at the 
baths soon, would Leif would like to join, ah maybe 
later, he jumbles words (and half bows?) and keeps 
on, alone. 

Necklacing mantle escarpment takes him 
around the bluff, although as he elevates so do the 
waves. Sandy platforms on this raised level are 
another beach above the first. When Leif’s 
Symphony Number Zero was performed in his 
early thirties, a door opened onto a hallway of 
infinities. Ten years on, working on his Fifth, the 
infinite is a dwindling expanse that only finds 
pause when he a) falls in partial love with 
somnambulant women, b) hal-lucinates musical 
revelation, c) forgets he is a man on the earth. 
Come sun, peer through overlapping projector 
slides of memory, embolden his skin. Leif loses his 
shirt - it rises like a kite untethered (a flag of 
convenience). 

Handel’s Water Music and a panpipe 


29 


version of Annie’s Song by John Denver are 
cornerstone musical memories from Leifs youth 
(both in D Major) - the former its technical 
elegance, starbright still after centuries of replay; 
the latter how the sounds filled him, all of not yet 
out of primary school, with solitudinal pining for 
inexact love. Recollection of a double date a decade 
later - car licence ink still wet from the registration 
bureau, he and a mate, both wearing black, 
standing in a service station backlot with two 
beautiful girls, both wearing white, like pieces on a 
chessboard, rules of geometry restricting 
movement. The cormorant drags a shadow out to 
sea. 

The tideglass ocean veils defragmented 
shimmer, white moving pixels on crests, cove 
drawn now as Leif mounts a quartz dune that fans 
up and against the cliff, a vertical beach that 
disorients his footing. Wind shuffles the wall of 
sand into ambient variations of Katita playing out 
imagined domestic postures - watering lamb’s ear, 
pivoting to a caravan, nestling the zeitgeist. His 
feet hold up well as he forms a suspension bridge 
between grain and crag, although not his shorts 
which tear on a sawtooth rail from the old coal 
line. He leaves them behind, sure that nobody will 
meet him out here what with sea levels rising, 
besides he can fashion a loincloth from coastal 
rosemary (Westringia fruticosa) if the end of history 
isn’t done yet. 


30 


Against the upright beach is a boulder the 
size of a train carriage, levitated here by ancient 
communal forces, men of a certain generation, 
that presents Leif with a significant disadvantage 
to progress: it must be ascended, which he tries, 
fingers in divets, soles convexed, blue eyes 
warbling now as his nerve loosens. Oh man, he’s 
frozen. Perhaps to look down, sharp rockfall and 
deep ocean, good, that makes things worse. Leif 
thinks about the canon of Western sound, Baroque 
to Romantic, to regain composure. Why this 
trajectory (sideways music) - in school, he liked 
Beethoven instead of Metallica, as if making the 
better choice, but why not something beyond this 
narrative, to make Ludwig the dud choice, 
something that surpasses the best of all possible 
worlds. 

This is where Leif falls (Da Capo al Fine). 
The sound his naked body makes is recognisable as 
both single-toned, a crystalline plop, and 
multidimensional, all possible variations of sound 
roaring into a cavalcade of reasons he walked away 
from Katita after she asked him to swim. He’d 
rather transmute the memory into music, that’s 
how he’s always done things - a song is a landscape 
with all the people removed, a blueprint for how to 
fashion a kiss in a state of suspended animation, 
beyond the mess of real-time: look at the way 
Katita embraces him now, beneath wave collapse 
and signal fade, heart sonar, her body a mass of 


31 


bubbles. It’s okay, she smiles, relax, you can look, 
and he closes his eyes as light trembles to a perfect 
pitch. 


32 


33 


34 


Garden Monologue #2: 
Summer Endzone 


The heat is in honest service to 
light, in dedication to afternoon 
from high vantage in the garden 
lectured to with blades by Leif’s 
parents 


thirty years ago, he takes solace 
that children remember nothing 
of being pre-verbal, nothing too 
of being pre-determined, press 


clippings 


kneaded into blood and or bone 
for the orchids, the rose garden 
still where it was, the roots have 
not plucked into little green feet 
traipsing 


the lawn where the city organist, 
Leif’s teacher, resides on the hill 
(re: 1880 Darwin, “The Power of 
Movement in Plants”). Katita has 
the radio on. 


35 


The heat dwells in waves 
that hold their bodies significantly. 
Time is rendered ambulate 
in praise of last days, 
suspended 


heat that broadcasts its heat 
as summer becomes entropic. 


Leif likes the feeling of dying sun 
against his house sitting, 

Katita toward the information 
of her skin, brown broadsheets 
that wave as she rotates, 

her opinion pages now knee 
pressed into blood and or bone 


(when she moves the reportage 
follows, a quarter million 

trees per annual publication 

in the old world, add residuals 
for each solar rotation of 
pastoral crypto turbine text 
generation, lenticular declivities 


36 


of her creases in motion, zinc 
hand prints patted and 

dragged in waves across 

her back, shoulders, knees 

and doze, re: 1880 Darwin 

and so on re: somnambulate 
and so on). She has the radio on. 


While Katita naps, Leif relapses 
into reverie about recreating 
a documentary he has never seen 


(only thirty second snippets 

on the national film and sound 
archive website, ‘Bastards 

from the Bush' with Les Murray 


and Bob Ellis, school mates 
visiting locations of formative 
significance) but would like 

to reenact in his own way, he 
would be Les and his mate 
would be Bob, they'd go back 
to Warners Bay High School, 
to the strip of fast food haunts 


in Belmont, to invented sites 
where they'll perform gestures 
of realism, dress in costumes 
of meaning, of neosimulacrum. 


While Katita rouses, Leif lapses 
out of fictional autobiography 
and becomes landscape again. 


On the radio 

the voice says everybody wants 

to think they're the end of history. 
The voice says there is a reason 
the apocalypse beckons a party. 
Otherwise, when would you know 
it's time to pop the champagne? 


On the radio 

the voice says humanity is void 

of meaning but not of ideology. 
The voice says our consciousness 
requires stories like lungs need air. 
Necessary fictions - they do not 
speak of the real, only the gap. 


On the radio 


the voice starts to talk about what 
it is to be Australian. Katita listens. 


38 


To be Australian 

is to play pinball 

in a coastal leisure centre 

in view of the beach 

and its silhouettes, 

its late century ocean sparkle 
of Morse code diamonds 


threaded into the ten 
J. M. W. Turner paintings 
every man in his forties needs to see, 


raised on the novels of Hermann Hesse 
between wars, on the affirmations 

of Nietzsche on what it is to be Australian, 
the Down Under Over Man, 

the Foster Tuncurry scene 

with New Journalists 

sleeping on the sand, where ninety-two 

in the shade is exactly thirty-three to the 
decimal with an endless repetition 

of threes to the centigrade, 


apologies to the International Committee 
for Weights and Measures, 

apologies to Anders Celsius, 

nineteen forty-eight in the shade, the same 
day Columbia Records introduced the very 


39 


same ratio, a record 
that spins at thirty-three 
and one-third revolutions per minute, 


eighteenth June, when another revolution 
spun out, the Malayan Emergency 

and how to be an Australian 

Avro Lincoln bomber is to drop 

two hundred and thirty-kilo affirmations, 


you think of this as an Australian when you 
mosey through Murrurindi on foot, 

along the wobble of the suspension bridge, 
the two-story garden shed 

with so many missing panes 

the size of LP album covers, rattled out 
perhaps by divine wind, 

the neighbouring yard housing 

so many reused glass bottles 

filled with dirt brown water and offcuts of 
native Australian labour, 


of a capacity to recite the lines 

of early Australian poets like Alby Pope, 
Wilko Ernie Henley, Frostey the Noman, 
Agro's Cartoon Connection, 

Hey Hey it's Alfie Tennyson 

writing a stirring evocation 

of the first media war, 


40 


of Churchill in the West Wing as 
Australia's first war president, of 

one Theirs not to make reply, 

two Theirs not to reason why, 

three Theirs but to do and die, with an 
endless repetition of threes, 

thesis antithesis synthesis 

(although not necessarily in that order), 


it was easier to make a living when you 
were writing, as an Australian, for entry 


into the Oxford Dictionary of Quotations, 
an accessibility of meaning, a still-living god, 
a child of eight and an octogenarian both 
able to enjoy the recitation of verse, those 
songs everybody knows so well rolled out 
on the pianola in nursing homes, show tunes 


from nineteen thirties Australian riverboat 
space operas - On The Sunny Side Of The 
Street, Over The Rainbow, As Time Goes By, 
Beautiful Dreamer, Julia Jacklin covering 
Someday by The Strokes, Holly Throsby 
covering Berlin Chair by You Am I, Slowed 
Reverb Test Drive by Joji, anything live on 
KEXP, Samurai Pizza Cats Episode One, 


41 


Chopin's Opus Twenty Five Number Twelve 
performed on the Light Organ, 

Marianna Simnett using 

machine learning to project 

Australian species of light entertainment 
onto her face, Corey Feldman 

on Howard Stern, Beniamino Gigli 

singing Handel's Largo for His Master's Voice 
with Herbert Dawson on the Light Organ, 


A Message to Young People 

by Andrei Tarkovsky 

delivered at the demolition of the Newcastle 
Council Carpark on the twenty-eighth of May 
two thousand and twenty-two at ten past 
twelve (just after midday), opposite the 
Cathedral, the graves of shipwreck victims 


trying to make passage into the harbour, 
along the shoreline, you think of 
Australian writers such as Joseph Conrad 
and Hermann Melville, bunkmates 

on the Adolphe they left washed 

against the breakwall at Stockton 

as if it wasn't their problem, as if 

they had nothing to do with the 
romancing of water, 


42 


when the customs agents 

asked John Berger, when he emigrated to 
Australia, if he had any criminal convictions, 
and he replied, in his best Sherman's March, 
that he didn't know 

this was still a requirement, 


how this is very much not what it is to be an 
Australian today, on Jimmy Stewart reading a 
touching poem about his dog Beau, yes 


this is what it means to be an Australian, 
to live in the Tropic of Capricorn, 

the Largesse of the South, inventing 

the Cochlear implant and WiFi and 
permanent crease clothing, 


on the first date we might imagine 
between Dymphna Cusack (of Black 
Lightning, The Sun Is Not Enough, 
Come In Spinner with Florence James, 
although not necessarily in that order) 
and William T Vollmann as depicted by 
Ron Howard in Grand Theft Auto 
about the life of Australian logician 
Kurt Godel, his pet name for Dymphna, 
Leonardo's Bride, she taking carriage 


43 


of a research grant into the ecology of 
coastal communities, of the myths 
presented on the vertical backlit stands 
of pinball tables, 


her a whimsigoth vision 

crossing the floor of the leisure centre in a 
crimson corset and permanent crease 
starfield skirt, he in his most affordable 
Australian smile, not quite 


like that on the tarmac 

of a prisoner exchange 

so much as the curve suggested by 
the presence of an inland empire, 


how it pulls everything in, 

how she pulled him towards her, 
allegedly, and said - 

‘Advance’. 


Katita tweaks, she asks Leif, did the voice 
on the radio just say 'Advance' 


and Leif says remember Johann Miller, 
how what we share, the closest thing 

to a human universal, is our innate capacity 
to get things wrong, and Katita says, 


44 


well how do I call in to find out, and 

Leif says that pirate radio doesn't have 

a talk back line, and Katita says 

says who, and then says well I'm going 
to find the station, and then she picks 
up the radio, still with decent charge 
with its three C-size batteries, and walks 
the wireless down the hill into the city. 


Leif watches her descend into 
Summer as he reclines into 

an absence already replaced 

by a company of interior voices. 


Perhaps he should recreate 

all of YouTube now that 

it is gone, the Internet Archive 
gone, no books or CDs left 

to refer to, no media other 
than memory - blessed day. 


From Tyrrell to Newcomen 
and then Church and Bolton 
Katita is lowered into the 
magma phasing heat of the 
city, sure the smell of salt 
from the sand is in the air 
but otherwise it's just tar 
and glass and radio sputter. 


45 


The signal amplitude grows pregnant 
and not between gaps in geometry, 
waving voice and not, distortion 

from a four-piece cutting in 

at the Royal Exchange 

as bowed guitars are fed into 

a Moog vocoder ring modulating 
power chords and the sparking of a 
dodgy 1/4" cable that leaks Angel smiles. 


There is a voice that might be 

a crossed transmission 

cutting in on Katita's radio, 

the same pirate frequency 

or near enough, it says 

I just want to make pretty 
women laugh forever, it says 
miracles shouldn't go on 

forever, it says that to be happy 
is to forgive oneself for existing 
(but not forever, just for a while), 
it says meaning is the structure 
we impose on the void (but not 
etcetera, just for etcetera), it says 
that to remain a nihilist into 
middle-age is an act of courage 
and rebellion that should result 
in transmissions of love forever. 


46 


This is an ordinary devotion 
to the long afternoon of youth, 
to the laughter of audiences 
of long-dead stand-up comics, 
to the mumbling of chatbots 


and morning pyjama topologies. 


The Summer feels significant. 
Katita doesn't know if it's the 
holiday vibe, the combination 
of Christmas and New Years, 
but it's there. 


You can feel it all around you. 
Mornings are wide balconies 
and spaghetti strap leanings, 
the breeze means something 
real, potential. 


Skateboard lunches motivate 
absolution in oceans present 

and imagined, windows open 
and imagined, linguistics shy 
to offer more. 


Say less, relax like you're dead 
with bonus life cheat codes in 
the back of a foreign magazine 
featuring a centrefold of cyber 
pastoralism. 


47 


Our local data farms have been 
stacked with endless Summers. 


The Summer feels significant 
when Leif thinks back to high 
school and modem sleepovers 
when websites were new, new 
economics. 


A pizza company made a page 
where you could order online 
in a novel way without paying 
first, you waited till the driver 
turned up. 


Leif and his mates ordered one 
or two pizzas as a prank using 

the poorly coded web form not 
sure it even worked, hit refresh 
a few times. 


What do you know, the delivery 
vans just kept arriving as ifina 

parade, streaming internet food 
(twelve pizzas I heard?). Finally 

they stopped. 


The prank target was the host of 
a televised morning fitness show. 


48 


On the radio 
the voice keeps on now about what 
it is to be Australian. Katita listens. 


To be Australian is 

to ignore the bridge load limit, 

to ignore both the maximum vehicle 
mass and maximum speed, and 

when the sign says only one vehicle 

at a time on the bridge 

you question whether that includes the 
cloud of dragonflies bundled 

like a voluminous airship, pressing 

their domain from a high angle, like that 
of a camera phone pressed at a high angle 
above the faces of snapdragons and 
fibre cloth and five o’clock pansies, 

to be captured and then 

shared with no one, 


to knock off at five o’clock and 

park your wife in the car outside The Kent 
while you walk in for a beer and then 
sometime later walk out to pass her 

a glass of lemon squash 

through the car window, 


for to be Australian is 
to appreciate chain reactions, 


49 


to direct high volumes of light 
at peanut butter to make it glow, and 


to be Australian is 

to wear Day-Glo to a funeral 

during your lunch break, the necessity 
of the living, even though 

you make everybody in your perimeter 
a target now, from a high angle, 


you and everyone you confuse with love 

are now in the mortal crosshairs, too visible, 
for to be Australian is to crave visibility 
within the fog of great southern anonymity, 
the invisible green and the sense of gold 
still on the statue of St Joseph’s head 

as you light a candle exclusively 

for the intent of powering stable 
cryptocurrencies, and so say all of us, 


during a final call for drinks, 
the one who says he will shout 
the entire pub a nightcap, 

the way grandfathers look 
upon this man as one who has 
reached the highest estimation, 
the better angles of our nature, 
and so say all of us. 


50 


By echo double and white noise halo 
Katita thinks she is getting closer to 
the source (and and so so say say all 

all of of us us ccacrkzsashhadvance). 


Conceptual art students are forming 
a ladder of bodies up to the top floor 
of Bolton Street Carpark, surfers are 
taking their chance at riding it down 


in one smooth amplitude, like Ninja 
Turtles mid-Cowabunga, part of the 
handshake social contracts between 
athletic cores and Doc Martin poets 


smoking and drinking beers outside 

the empty post office near the YMCA 
while slow dancing to coal ship horns 
and the rub of earth's roof on heaven. 


Historians designate this Last Summer. 


A pucker lips so soft and rue roll on in 

Leif’s highlight reel of road trips 

with Katita to postage stamp towns 

offering Chew Choo Takeaways 

that are never open, cafeterias sidled 

on brassware antique stores also never open, 


51 


antique trees in long grass fields ready to 
elevate, paperbark rockets from the old world, 
song lines and antinomies of current locales: 


Katita looks like a plastic token sliding 
across a board game from on high in the 
organist’s garden, Leif pincers his fingers 
as binoculars, avoiding right-wing gestures, 
see now as she skips past the ladder but 
snags a snake that drags her east 
through a laneway with a shower for 
residents to wash saltwater off, though 
now it is used by late-night lovers 

who act so offended when they are 

yelled at to stop, but we’ve brought soap 
they say, come on brother, but this 

isn’t the sixties, not even the nineties, 
this is a period without suffix, ahistorical. 


Historians designate this Vast Bummer. 


A group shot of them and their friends 
behind a six-pack of soft white loaf rolls 
and a tub of coleslaw, all their smiling 
faces, or very nearly smiling, very nearly 
all, mirror balls swaying on the beach. 
On the beach. 

On the beach. 


52 


That's where the radio host says they'll 
going to avoid speech, handing off 

the headphones to Katita, 

she found them on the ground floor 

of the Returned and Services Leagues club 
or very nearly, not quite a radio host, they 
are a broken window sash waltzed 

by salt currents, flung against a telegraph 
key that transmits a capacity to synthesize 
the human voice, it like all sound 

just a series of binary pulses 

converted into pitch due to a time delay 
ranging from imperceptibly small gaps 

to tens of thousands of years, organ music 
like that of the piece being played right now 
in Saint Burchadi church in Halberstadt, 
the chord changes in the first part of the 
composition will occur in forty-six years. 


Leif won't be around to hear it. 

He can't hear it now. He can't hear 

Katita as she decides not to say 

anything into the microphone 

about what it means to be Australian 
because there is no microphone 

and she has nothing to say. She just hums. 


53 


54 


She hums the melody from We'll Meet Again 
by Ross Parker and Hughie Charles, sang, 
of course, by Vera Lynn - did you know 

it features the first usage of a polyphonic 
synthesizer on a music recording, that's 
what Leif will one day tell their daughter 
as he looks at the water - did you know 
that water is a viable data storage medium, 
you can fit a terabyte of household data 

in a tablespoon if it's part of a solution 
containing 12-nanoparticle clusters at a 
concentration of three percent. How many 
selfies could the ocean hold, how many 
large language models and simulations of 
the life to come. Leif will meet Katita on 
the beach soon where the heat is still and 
is still in honest service to light, heat that 
broadcasts its heat in collapsing waves. 


55 


56 


Ambient 1-4 


Act 1 


Scene: Interior of an old tennis clubhouse, 
situated on a hill overlooking the water. 


Aman anda woman in their forties, in a long-term 
relationship, are the only occupants in the 
clubhouse. 


The man, A, is standing, holding a container of 
tennis balls. The woman, B, is sitting at a desk, 
holding a pencil in front of an empty pad, listening 
to a weak RADIO transmission fade in and out. 


A: 

Removes a single tennis ball from the container of balls. 
Do you think, if I threw one of these balls down the 
hill, towards the road, that it could make it all the 
way down to the water? 


B: 
Listens carefully to the static of the radio transmission. 


57 


RADIO: 

A barely distinguishable voice recites a series of numbers. 
Fourteen, fifty-three, eighty-nine, seventeen, forty- 
five, sixty-nine, twenty-nine, sixty-eight, ninety- 
one, one, thirty-three, forty-nine, seventy-nine, 
eighty-four, eight, twenty, thirty-nine, sixty-one, 
ninety-nine, twenty-three. 


A: 

Hefts the tennis ball, throwing it up and down. 

The hill is pretty steep. As long as I threw it at just 
the right angle so the ball travelled somewhat 
down the centre of the road, so it doesn't lose 
traction in the gutter or get stuck behind a can or 
something, I honestly think it could make it. 


B: 
Leans in towards the radio, adjusting a dial to try and 
get clearer reception. She places her pencil on the pad. 


RADIO: 

A slightly more unintelligible voice recites the following 
numbers. 

Seven, three, nineteen, forty-four, twelve, fifty- 
five, one, ninety-nine, twenty, thirty-three, eleven, 
eighteen, sixty-six, four, seventy-three, eighty- 
eight, two, forty-one, five, zero. 


B: 
That's the first zero we've heard in weeks. 


58 


What's the date today? 


A: 

Bounces the ball on the ground and catches it. 

They have a fair bounce. I genuinely think with the 
right launch, the right trajectory, the right attitude, 
this ball could make it all the way to the water. To be 
baptised. To float beneath the sun and moon, 
forever, or thereabouts. 


B: 
I think it's the first. The first of something. 


RADIO: 
An untelligible drone of static emits from the radio. 


B: 
Leans in towards the radio, adjusting a dial to try and 
get clearer reception. 


A: 

I'm going to throw one out the window and see if 
it makes it down to the water. Watch this. 

The man throws the ball hard. It hits a closed window 
and bounces back, nearly hitting the radio on the table. 


RADIO: 


An old song begins to fade in. 
It sounds like We'll Meet Again' by Vera Lynn. 


59 


B: 
Sits back and looks at the radio in bemused disbelief. 
Just when you think you're onto something. 


A: 

Here, I'll open the window. 

It'll help with the signal. 

Walks over to the window and slides it open. 


B: 
Looks at the open window with concern. 
You shouldn't leave it open. 


A: 

Acouple minutes won't hurt, not at this stage. 
Here, watch this. 

He picks up the tennis ball from earlier and throws it 
hard out the window. It disappears from view. 


RADIO: 
The radio transmission begins to whoop, bend and volley 
through some sort of frequency interference. 


B: 
Leans in adjusts the dials on the radio. 
Close the window. 


A: 


Leans on the open window, looking out. 
You have the road sloping down to the harbour, 


60 


and then you have a train station at the bottom, 
and beyond that you have like a little jetty that the 
balls could roll straight out on and then - 'plop' - 
into the drink. It's like a reverse pinball machine 
where the goal is not to avoid the drain but to 
actually aim for it. Like, imagine tennis but instead 
of a net it's the ocean. 


B: 
Looks incredulously at this man, her life partner. 
You mean like ten pin bowling? 


RADIO: 
The radio fizzles and then pops. It goes silent. 


A: 

Ten thin foal wings, five unicorns ready to launch, 
eighty-seven rockets, twenty balls, twenty-four, 
thirty-three, sixteen, two, fifty-two, bless you, zero. 


61 


Act 2 


Scene: Interior of a wooden cabin situated in a 
remote rural setting. A couple, A and B, in their 
early twenties are cuddling together on a sofa. 


A table is nearby with a RADIO broadcasting a bird 
song. The table is beneath a closed window. 


RADIO: 
Bird song plays on the radio. 


B: 
It's beautiful. 


A: 

Do you think it's singing to another bird? 

Is all bird song for another bird, or do they ever 
just sing for their own pleasure? It seems like it 
would always be in service of mating, but I really 
don't know. Either way, it's quite stunning. 


B: 

Mating. Tell me everything you know and don't 
know about birds. Tell me everything you do and 
don't know about birds at the end of history. Tell 
me in your own bird song. 


62 


A: 
Okay. 


B: 
Only don't tell me anything about planes. 


I won't. 


And please don't go into anything about drones 
dressed up in artificial feathers of flight. 


A: 
Of course. 


B: 

Nor anything about people dressed up in bird 
costumes as part of pantomime or military spy 
functionality or superhero live action roleplay. 


RADIO: 

Bird song continues playing on the radio, but a 
clipping sound makes it sound like the bird song has 
just looped and restarted from the beginning. 


A: 
Did you hear that? 


63 


B: 
What did it sound like to you? 


A: 
It sounded like the bird song started again. 


B: 
Like a loop restarting from the beginning. 


A: 
I thought it was live. 


B: 

I still think it is. Maybe it was another bird song 
coming in from the outside. 

Stretches arms and neck to look towards the window 
above the table. 

Can you please open the window and check. 


A: 
Gets up and moves over to the table. 
Tries to open the window but can't get it to budge. 


B: 
That's okay. Come back here and snuggle. 


A: 
Crashes back on the couch into Cou's arms. 


64 


RADIO: 
Bird song continues to play. 


B: 
If we had a spectrogram - 


A: 
A what? 


B: 
A spectrogram, they show what sounds look like. 
Imagine your voice fogging up a mirror. 


A: 

Would an artificial bird song look different to a 
real bird song? Would one be the ghost of a sound 
and the other the bones? 


RADIO: 

Bird song continues playing on the radio, but another 
clipping sound makes it sound like the bird song has just 
looped and restarted again. 


B: 

Tell me everything you know about love. Tell me 
everything you know about love at the end of 
history. Tell me everything you know about 
tomorrow. 


65 


A: 
Okay. 


B: 
Only don't tell me anything about planes. 
I don't want to hear that they extend indefinitely. 


RADIO: 
The bird song clips and cuts to silence. 


B: 
Can you try the window again, please? 


A: 

Gets up and moves over to the table. 

Tries to open the window. This time it rises. 
Cups ear to listen out the window. Shakes head. 


66 


Act 3 


Scene: Interior of a small room situated in a lake 
district. A man and a woman in their sixties are 
the only occupants. 


The man, A, is standing with his back to a window, 
looking down at his feet. The woman, B, sits at a 
desk and reads from a surveyor's journal. 


B: 

Thirty-one point four three zero zero three one 
degrees south. One hundred and fifty-two point 
nine one nine eight one one degrees east. 
Elevation two hundred and seventy-three metres. 


A: 
Mumbles and nods his head. 
Shuffles feet. 


Mumbles and nods his head again. 


B: 

Thirty-two point nine two eight three six degrees 
south. One hundred and fifty-one point one five 
nine seven two degrees east. Elevation one 
hundred and ten metres. 


67 


A: 

Chuckles to himself. 

Looks up at the ceiling, shakes his head in disbelief. 
Chuckles to himself again. 

We saw an angel there once. 

Standing in a field. Do you remember. 

It was hovering above the ground. 


B: 

Thirty-two point four zero five six seven five 
degrees south. One hundred and fifty-two point 
two zero five four one zero degrees east. Elevation 
nine metres. 


A: 

You bought a sort of toast with mince on it from a 
shop around the corner from there. Seasoned 
mince. We stood on the diving board of the pool 
together and you told me you were pregnant. 


B: 
Wearily shakes her head. 
No. 


A: 

No. It's where you bought peaches. They were 
warm from the sun. You said your whole childhood 
smelled like that. 


68 


B: 

Looks up to the ceiling and then down. 
Wearily shakes her head again. 

No. 


A: 
No. We have never been there. 


B: 
We have never been there. 


A: 
Mumbles and nods his head. 
Shuffles feet. 


Mumbles and nods his head again. 


B: 

Thirty-four point four zero three two two degrees 
south. One hundred and fifty point eight one five 
eight six degrees east. Elevation one hundred and 
twelve metres. 


A: 

We saw a mural of a boy with his hands in his 
pockets. No, a pelican. You said it looked like I 
used to look when I stood with my hands in my 
pockets. No, not a mural, a painting on the wall of 
a service station. A novelty gift in a frame. It 
opened its mouth when you clicked your fingers 
near a sensor. It made you laugh. 


69 


B: 

Looks up to the ceiling and then down. 

I never knew you as a boy. Nor saw any photos. 
Only a graphite sketch produced in the newspaper. 


A: 
I was the only one left behind. 


B: 
They were illustrating caricatures for a fair. 


A: 
I will be that young again one day. 


B: 

Thirty-two point nine two two three eight nine 
degrees south. One hundred and fifty-one point 
seven four three three nine five degrees east. 
Elevation sixty-four metres. 


A: 
Mumbles and shakes his head. 
Shuffles feet. 


You've read that one before. 


Nods. 


70 


A: 
We're back to the beginning. 


B: 
No. We're back to where we started. 


A: 


The bedside lamp flickered like Morse code. 


71 


Act 4 


Scene: Interior of a small, round room with 
concrete walls, like a wartime radio transmission 
bunker. A man, A, is on his back, motionless, on a 
canvas folding cot. A woman, B, sits at a desk and 
listens to a weak RADIO transmission. They are in 
their eighties and are the only occupants. 


RADIO: 
A steady hiss of static emits without perceptible feature. 


B: 

It sounds like the sea. Not coastal waters. Not 
shoreline. Not when I was girl accompanying a 
friend to the seaside, traveling with his family. My 
mother said, make sure to not go out too far into 
the water, you can't swim very well. I had already 
nearly drowned once at a neighbourhood party 
when I couldn't get my head above the deep end of 
the pool. Someone jumped in to save me as I was 
lashing my arm out of the water, I could see the 
world above me, those bright suburban skies, 
those adults unwatching, as ripples. Who saved 
me. My father or some other father. 


RADIO: 
No alteration in static. 


72 


B: 

With my friend at the seaside, with his family, we 
got a paddle boat with large yellow wheels. We 
drove across the water with his two younger 
siblings on board. His father said, don't get too far 
out, but his father was also the sort to encourage 
human displays of bravado, to champion 
recklessness as a sign of future economic mastery, 
like stock brokers performing wild motorbike 
jumps on a work retreat, so it was difficult to tell 
whether his father actually cared if we went too far 
out or not, or even what the father's metric for too 
far even was, if he even had a metric for that, 
depending on whether his wife, my friend's step- 
mother, was watching, and whether if her 
watching would mean he was more or less cavalier 
about his appetite for risk, like if he thought 
showing disregard for his kids, for the biological 
evidence of his former marriage, would make him 
seem more or less desirable as a new partner, as a 
father still holding onto the title, more or less, for 
better or worse. 


RADIO: 
No alteration in static. 


B: 
So we went too far out. Much too far out. 


73 


I couldn't swim, we'd already ascertained that. The 
youngest of my friend's siblings was around four 
years old. The next eldest was six. We were nine 
and we were all much too far out. The youngest, 
the four year old, he started to slip off the edge of 
the paddle boat, I can still see his little hands 
trying to get a grip on the wet seat, some texture 
on the big yellow wheels even, but they turned with 
him, into the water. My friend and I reached for 
him, the youngest one, each grabbing a hand and 
pulling him back onto the boat safely, onto the wet 
seat where he sat hugging his older brother, the six 
year old. We looked towards the shore where my 
friend's father was waving desperately, yelling 
silently, even across the water his voice didn't 
carry, we were too far to hear him, but we knew 
what he was saying. My friend's step-mother 
looked like she was holding her hands over her 
mouth, trying to stop something inside of her 
from coming out. 


RADIO: 
No alteration in static. 


B: 

We turned the paddle boat around and made our 
way back to shore. I can't remember if we were 
chastised or not, if my friend was chastised or not, 
if I was chastised or not. It seemed to be at the 
time that it would have been very impolite if my 


74 


friend's father had even considered chastising me, 
since it was not the done thing to discipline a child 
who is not your own, at that time, in family 
networks like the ones we were loosely within. 
However, it is likely that I should have been 
chastised, for I was the one who encouraged us to 
go further out. My friend was not a risk taker, he 
was much too afraid of his father for that. He 
didn't want to be rejected by his father any more 
than he thought he perhaps already had been, 
since he was not a boy of rogue action like his 
father seemed to value, was too passive for his 
father's acclaim for boundary pushers. I was the 
one my friend's father would have preferred as a 
chip off the old block, temperamentally speaking, 
if I was a boy and not a girl, although in this 
instance it is unclear if he would have been pleased 
with me for being such a risk taker, for putting his 
children in a position where death was just around 
the corner, or beneath the surface so to speak, was 
mere seconds away for the youngest had we not 
gripped his little hands in time, or whether this 
would have been seen as risk taken too far, not a 
display of overcoming nature, of silencing fear in 
the face of the sort of rewards that capitalism fills 
you up with if you stare it down and shout I into 
the heart of its machinery, but the sort of 
recklessness that is seen as gross and indecent, 
like staying too long at the roulette table, not 
knowing when to quit. Although, we had brought 


75 


everyone back safely, we went up to the brink and 
faced off against disaster and calmly returned to 
the placid lapping of water against shale, that 
pebbly grit which told me we weren't at home, not 
pressing our soles into the powdery sand of our 
local beach, no we had to travel how long to get 
here, to the broken shells that risked cutting your 
feet if you stepped on them the wrong way. You 
know what I should have done. I should have 
looked my friend's father in the eyes when I 
stepped back onto shore, onto one of those broken 
shells, hard, pushing it down beneath the grit, not 
breaking my gaze from my friend's father's eyes, 
and I should have said, now I am the father. This is 
my family now. And I should have taken my 
friend's step-mother by the hand and said, let's go, 
towards the station wagon, looking back over my 
shoulder to my friend, shouting to him, are you 
coming, bring your brothers, and then I would 
have turned the key in the ignition and said, who 
wants to listen to the radio, and they all would 
have said me, me daddy, put on the station that 
plays all of our family favourites. 


RADIO: 


A brief tremor in the static, like a subtraction of 
frequencies, a blip, a plop, a drop, emerges. 


76 


B: 

Leans in. 

What is that? 

It sounds like something falling. 


Dropping into the water. Round like a zero. 


There it goes again. Plop. And another. 


77 


78 


Peoplehood 


It is the eleventh of January and the new 
year is still fresh out of the oven. My daughter is 
with a friend and my wife is accompanying our 
son to preschool so J decide to enact an idea I have 
had for some months - to walk the length of 
Industrial Drive. 

While I was a frequent visitor to Newcastle 
as a young lad it was only in my twenties that I 
moved here, near the university. I remember one 
day driving some friends, who lived in the east end 
of town, to see my place and I couldn't quite work 
out how to get from the inner city to the 
edgelands. I had particular routes in mind but they 
all seemed inefficient, particularly as evening was 
setting and GPS and phone maps were not 
mainstream. 

By chance I took a turn down Industrial 
Drive and it felt as though I had entered a dream 
state. What was this annex that ignored all 
residential realities and posited as a pipeline from 
the tundra outskirts of the city through a starfield 
of high tower glitter and train line sweep. 


79 


Maitland 
Taree 


This will sound like a joke at best for any 
locals in the area who recognise the dual 
carriageway as nothing less than baseline banality, 
a featureless eight kilometre stretch that serves 
little more than to connect the thoroughfare to and 
from Maitland and the Hunter Region with 
Newcastle harbour. There is no 'dream state’ about 
it, except perhaps within the ghosts of its 
industrial history, as a necklace that skirted the 
city within a city that was the Broken Hill 
Proprietary steelworks which dominated the 
region between 1911 until its demolition in 1999, 
employing nearly fifty thousand residents across 
the century. 


80 


The economic impact caused to the nearby 
suburbs by the polluted output is still apparent. 
Gentrification is the holy word sprayed on the 
walls of young coffee shops and pizzerias trying to 
shake off the smog that foreclosed the 
neighbourhood and sent families to the other side 
of the lake. A nearby school I taught in saw that its 
empty classrooms soon needed to be split in half to 
fit all the new enrollments in the decade since the 
steelworks collapsed. 

There is no pedestrian access along 
Industrial Drive. It is for vehicles only, often fuel 
tankers not permitted to drive through residential 
streets. While the steelworks are closed it is still 
home to heavy industry - petrol depots, coal 
exports and shipping containers at the port, 
manufacturing. 

I meet a council worker mowing the lawn, 
he stops and asks me if I need help and I explain 
what I'm doing. He says he wouldn't be here if he 
wasn't working, a nice day like this, if he were 
twenty years younger, my age, he'd be at the beach 
or at the pub. I ask if many people walk along here 
and he says sure, more than you'd think. 

Some years ago I began an online dialogue 
with a game designer who was seeking small funds 
to help finish a point and click game set in the 
Louisiana petrolbelt. To thank me for support he 
posted printouts of pixel art landscapes from the 
game. I knew the geography of desolate riverland 


81 


set against empty superhighway immediately - this 
was Industrial Drive, just another version of it, set 
on the other side of the world. 

We talked about our shared fascination 
with these landscapes. Both of us were repulsed by 
the way expansive natural settings had been 
choked by polluted industries and yet we were 
drawn to them, swooned by telegraph poles 
standing amid bushland like misplaced crucifixes, 
like a Friedrich David Caspar painting where the 
potential of Spinoza's  nature-as-god is 
theologically corrupted by the presence of a tiny 
stooped human distant against a rock. 

My recurring sentiment is that this 
attraction is one of analogy, that we look for 
landscapes that mirror the internal topography of 
our subjectivity. We see a sunset marred on the 
horizon by plumbs of distant smog and feel, 
unspoken, a metaphor for the last innocent hours 
of childhood before economics scheduled our 
future. 

When the designer finished the game he 
sent me a copy and I was delighted to see my name 
in the credits. As a young video game enthusiast I 
never anticipated seeing my name one day scroll 
down the closing sequence of a title. 


82 


There is a side street that turns off a rise in 
the road, it cordons an overgrown nature reserve 
that has a little playground and, my favourite part, 
a water bubbler nestled in an alcove of trees near 
absolutely nothing. It's a good walk from the 
playground, it's a good walk from anywhere, and 
it's everything I hope to find on these excursions. 

I imagine a question on a psychological 
screener: do you seek out symbols of isolation 
instead of community. 

My wife has a friend from her school days 
that lives around here, mere streets away, with two 


children of her own now. We see her now and 
then. 


‘Bowling Alone’, that seminal end-of-90s 
text by Robert Putnam on the decline of in-person 
social intercourse, rings true to me, but perhaps 
primarily so because I embrace the trend. I take 
solace in the world becoming ever more like an 
Edward Hopper painting, another set of painted 
metaphors, even as I rue the rise of corrupting 
populist forces that rush in to fill the void. 


Richard Yates knew it all too well, and 
realising that 'The Easter Parade’ will be fifty years 
old soon is a sobering thought. Were the seventies 
really half a century ago. In the nineties, only three 
percent of surveyed Americans said they had no 
close friendships. Today that number adds another 
ten points to its currency, and the pandemic just 


spotlighted the trend ever more starkly. The 
Australian statistics are pretty much at parity. 

There is a bridge here that crosses an 
access road and a rail line where trains trek coal 
from the Hunter out to ships at the port that sail to 
China. I remember seeing smokestacks near 
Shanghai one evening, behind a field and the 
basketball courts of a medical rehabilitation 
hospital, and wondering if the fuel was from some 
hole back home. 

An ex-colleague and I recently published a 
chapter in an academic textbook on the role of 
technology, specifically augmented reality, in 
supporting the soft skills involved in public 
sociability. 

Years ago, during the period you could buy 
monthly pocket guides on the best websites to 
visit, a single comic panel was published in the 
New Yorker that has gone on to become the most 
reproduced cartoon in the publications history. In 
the comic scene, a dog is sitting on a chair using a 
desktop computer, and he turns to a dog looking 
up from the floor and says, 'On the Internet, 
nobody knows you're a dog’. 

Friendships are now maintained through 
group messages, rarely through individual contact. 
Only the most intimate companionships are 
funneled into solitary text streams. Group chats 
are, like parties, entirely performative, every 
message either a setup or a punchline, although 


85 


the punchline is enough these days, no setup 
required, though sometimes, increasingly, there is 
no punchline either. 

Over the rail line Industrial Drive curves 
towards the barrier bushland and empty mansions 
of the BHP. There is a steel spring coil 
manufacturer near the lights. 

On the Internet, nobody knows what came before. 

One of the differences between virtual 
reality and augmented reality is that in the 
augmented version you can still see the offline 
world around you. A digital overlay is pressed 
against your field of view similar to what the pilot 
of a spaceship would see during some futuristic 
dogfight sequence rendered with neon 
coordinates and crosshairs. 

The gist of the chapter my colleague and I 
penned is that augmented reality could provide a 
supportive avenue for those seeking guidance in 
how to engage socially with others. 

Technology has been framed as 
antithetical to human consciousness since factory 
cogs began turning on their own, but do you 
remember Pokemon Go, the way that young 
people, including the shy, the nervous, a 
community of introverts, all gathered on the 
streets to catch pocket monsters with their phones. 

There are ways of getting people out onto 
the streets that don't necessarily lead to the Arab 
Spring. The new illusion will be standardised. 


86 


On the morning of the eighth of June 
nineteen forty two a Japanese submarine fired 
thirty four shells at the BHP steelworks. They 
landed over a broad expanse of Newcastle. Only 
one of the shells exploded, near my father's 
boyhood house in the east end near Parnell Place. 

There are two memorials positioned in the 
region some of the shells landed in the BHP zone 
but neither are in relation to the war. One is 
comprised of a ring of thin vertical metal rods with 
spheres atop. They look like burnt matches and 
represent the men and women who lost their lives 
through industrial accidents working at the site. 


87 


A second memorial, the Muster Point, 
stands as a four-walled building with no roof, 


signifying a conclusion to the steelworks 
operations. 

Both used to be accessible, you could just 
walk off Industrial Drive and push through a bit of 
bush and scrub and you'd be amongst them, but 
everything is fenced off now pending 
redevelopment plans to build something new. 

Great mansions also used to stand behind 
this zone, administration buildings of thirty and 
forty rooms. Twenty years beyond their utility they 
still remained in immaculate condition: no graffiti 
on the walls, no signs of forced entry. Security 
closely monitored the nearby port and rail lines, so 
this may have kept them safe. Not so other parts of 


88 


the city, Hunter Street Mall comes to mind, 
decimated, I took a walk with a close friend 
through there the other week, a mate from 
boyhood that I try to see once a year. Mostly we 
talk about the death of god and our favourite 
comedy routines. 

On this occasion he reminded me of 
something I said once, during our university days, 
about how I only need two chips from a bag: the 
first chip to know the sensation, the flavour, the 
second chip to feel what it's like to relive the 
experience of the first chip, to receive the gift of 
repetition, comfort in geometry, and that is 
enough. Any further chips are hollow mimicries of 
the critical first two. 


He says he thinks about that a great deal 
these days. 


A little up the road there are a set of 
three neat brick cottages. I don't know when 
they were built, they have similar architectural 
properties to turn-of-the-last-century homes a 
few streets back from the highway. They are 
unoccupied and would look all but abandoned 
except for two rows of garden beds between the 
cottages, each containing an assortment of 
different plants, a jumbled selection really of 
vegetables and ground foliage and varieties that 
could be arranged into sweetheart bouquets. 

Signs above the garden beds note that 
they are managed and monitored by the 
University of Newcastle, in coordination with 
local industry funding, to monitor the impact 
of polluted soil on the health of plants and 
agriculture. The same soil here is in the gardens 
of the homes across the road a few streets back 
from the highway. 

There are dozens of garden gnomes 
spread across the grounds of the cottages, 
particularly beside the driveway area. They are 
all spray painted in a universal silver. 

It is not always, if ever, easy to see 
what's coming down the road, so to speak. 
Industrial Drive only unfolds fifty metres at a 
time before it curves and turns beyond the 
range of any current vantage point, and this 
seems in line with any measured predictions of 
the future, no matter how much big data tries 


90 


to render science from wishful thinking. 


We have in recent years seen a lot of 
collective social action stem from online 
communities that have found their way into 
offline physicalities, shouts on the street. Some 
say that whenever a progressive movement 
begins online it results in an opposing, 
reactionary display of old world power that 
quickly works to subvert the possibility of 
change. 

Others still would say that social 
movements only succeed, like gains made in 
civil rights, when individuals are prepared to 
come together as real world communities and 
give their lives over to a cause, whether for 
years or forever. 


91 


What, then, is the relationship between 
the virtualisation of life lived online and the 
shout on the street. 

I have been following the rapid 
development of visual art generated by machine 
learning algorithms. At first, a long time ago 
(say, eighteen months) when the technology 
was in its infancy you would ask the computer 
to paint a picture of a face and it would give you 
a finger painting produced by a toddler in a 
dark room. Months later the face was more 
finely rendered, not unlike the quality a 
talented amateur artist could produce in an 
hour. Weeks beyond this the resulting computer 
generated portraits made the works of the Old 
Masters look poorly realised, and then, in what 
felt like mere hours later, the images produced 
by the algorithms made me look in the mirror 
and feel more uncanny than the most real, most 
human, faces looking out of the screen. 

The other week two images of pastoral 
landscapes were posted on an_ artificial 
intelligence forum. Which one, a question 
posited, was a real photograph and which was 
computer generated. The punchline was that 
both were undetectable fictions, and that they 
were posted by a bot. 

I stop at one of my _ favourite 
destinations anywhere, when I come upon 
them: a wooden bench seat beside a tree. You 


92 


find them out the back of service station truck- 
stops, in the rest areas of public institutions like 
council buildings and hospitals, near Lions Club 
waterside parks and boat ramps, and here, on 
the side of Industrial Drive, within view of 
some approaching sport fields. 

Researchers who study online social 
communities say that there has been a move in 
the past two years away from people accessing 
broad, public, all-access social networks 
towards smaller, curated, invite-only private 
servers. The big social networks are thought of 
as gross public spaces where animosity is 
fuelled and monetised by agents of chaos and 
their legions of bots, where elections and 
pandemics are called into question. But now the 
smaller servers are being marked as echo 
chambers where like-minded folk simply 
reinforce group-think cognitive bias. 

History will be written by the victorious 
code. 

During the pandemic, Major League 
Baseball games were played between two teams 
in stadiums void of fans. Yet when you watched 
the games on the television, or listened on the 
radio, you could hear the ambient roar of the 
crowd beneath the crack of ball meeting bat, 
and then an eruption of cheer when the ball 
arced into the empty stands. 

Where did the sounds come from - they 


93 


came from a video game version of baseball. 
Sounds from the game were extracted, seventy 
five effects and fan reactions, and then 
triggered at suitable moments through speakers 
within the stadium. Interviews with the players 
said they appreciated the audio, that it 
encouraged them to play their best. 

Video game sounds played in empty 
baseball stadiums, synthesising the presence of 
teeming thousands. On the radio you wouldn't 
know, but on the television, what a dissonant 
spectacle. Like an inverted Camus when he 
talked about looking through the glass windows 
of a dance hall full of revelers, what you'd think 
if you couldn't hear the music. 


94 


The end of Industrial Drive meets 
another main road that heads up into the 
coalfields. There isn't much to see up here - I 
can see the neighbourhood I moved into near 
the university, and if I turn back around to face 
where I've just walked from I can see an 
industrial area off to the west, beside the 
Hunter River. 

The estate is rezoned swampland turned 
warehouse buffet. They call it, you can't make 
this up, Steel River. 

I wonder if that's why the few dozen 
garden gnomes around the heritage cottages 
investigating contaminated soil are all spray 
painted silver. Probably not. 

One of the first warehouses I pass is a 
medical research facility. It's near another 
research operation, one investigating energy, 
that I took a class of school children to once. 
Our guide showed us how when you walked on 
the floors of the building the vibrations charged 


kinetic energy which fuelled the lights. So too 
the sapling birches outside, wires on their 
branches charged batteries as they swayed. 
Some years ago a mate of mine who 
works at the university in the _ biology 
department showed me a video game called 
Foldit. The object of the game is to fold protein 
structures as perfectly as possible. Ten years 


ago there were a quarter of a million people 
registered to play Foldit, I don't know what the 
current stats are. 

When I said the object of the game is to 
fold protein structures, what I should have 


more accurately said is that the premise of the 
game is to record how humans fold protein 
structures, to note the ways we go about the 
task, our creative wins and errors, in order to 
teach algorithms how to get better at doing the 
same. 

A 2019 research article reported that 
Foldit players were able to solve a set of protein 
problems more accurately than experts in the 
field and automated algorithms due to the game 
mechanics the players were employing. This 
accuracy will be taught to the computer. 

A crowd is not always inherently wrong. 

Consciousness is, it would appear, a 
collective phenomena. It does not exist in 
isolation - its ontology is birthed through 
dialogue. Like Wittgenstein's thing about how 
if a lion could talk we couldn't understand it, 
your mind is not yours alone. Like an analogy, it 
only exists as a mirror. 

Down by the Hunter River, a half 
kilometre from the thoroughfare of Industrial 
Drive, from the stream of vehicular traffic, I'm 
not walking down the non-pedestrian zone 
anymore, not flirting with being on the 
sidelines of the concrete information 
superhighway or suggesting anything about 
having one foot in and one foot out of that state 
of public community. Instead I'm in a 
subtracted space on the edgelands looking 


97 


98 


beyond the boundary, across the river to where 
some formless geography radiates potential. 

There are powerlines that span the gap. 
They are of the variety that transmit but do not 
receive, they are not bi-directional; likewise if 
you gaze for long into the plentitudes of 
community, the returning gaze cannot meet 
your eyes. 


a 


ceeee SaRETSet. = 


ss ai Aiesaate 


ye 


100 


Gnomon 


There is always a hole in a fence, 
eventually, that someone else has made. 
Local hoodlums, is that still the word, 
anticipated my palliate arrival with pliers, 
somewhere to smoke or shoot up or shag, 
is that still a word, but I’m thankful all 
the same because there is nowhere else 
in the city or the neighbourhood, is that 
still a thing, to walk my dog today, for 

all the good spots are taken and I don’t 
trust him to be social with other dogs, 
the only real trick I’ve ever taught him. 


The fence hole is in an industrial 

estate still being established, there is an 
unused quarter, is that still a thing, where 
I watch my dog run through yellow grass, 
or not so much run as bound, is that the 
word because it seems like he’s doing the 
very opposite of being bound, because 
giving a dog the opportunity to run free is 
a handsome thing but also reminds you of 
how this instinct is mostly restricted, but 
not today because look at where we are: 


northward is nothing but sky, 

I don’t mean straight above my head, 
although that is also nothing, I mean to 
the horizon, just some arm of a crane like 

a twig from this distance, it pivots in an arc 
like the gnomon of a sundial, pointing now 
towards the old gun barrel radio station on 
the hill that still distributes a signal, low 
powered, someone messing around with 
pirate frequencies, I know because I hear 
directions being read by a man wearing 
what sounds like a heavily pilled jumper. 


Transmission towers daisy 

chained by melancholy strings like 
Elgar would have liked seeing bowed, 
not heard necessarily, the visual would 
have been enough as it is now, seeing 
them become small as I back up towards 
the fence line, who knew the ground 
here would be so wet, is this what it has 
come to, seeking out sunken fields in a 
zone beyond the reason of townships, 
through a hole in a fence (ok I admit it 
was me who made the incision, is that 


102 


still a thing, admission, admission 

into this area, but I jest), somewhere for 
my dog to go unfettered, to walk without 
neighbours, to see cranes and grass and 
power pylons and rusted buildings on 
the hill beneath Tuesday dry sunlight, 
and while we need to turn back because 
we have run out of solid ground, there 
will be another day when we will return, 
not phased by how messy this sludge 
wander was, the nettles from the grass 
pinned to us saying ‘take me with you’. 


103 


104 


Fellow Disjecta, Oh 
Sunny Danger Time 


'His heart, a mud-puddle, sang’ - 
Dream Song 288, John Berryman 


105 


106 


I had been waxing lyrical on nineties nostalgia for 
what seemed like months to anyone who would care 
to listen when the Fabio goose incident came up 
across the dinner table. We laughed about it - about 
the idea of Fabio, about getting hit in the nose by a 
goose, the whole millennium closing kitsch of it all - 
and thought nothing more of it until the next day 
when I went for a bike ride. Without a word of a lie, I 
got hit in the nose by a sparrow as I was careening 
down a hill. It flew from left to right across my vision 
and drew blood from the bridge. 


My son is four and has recently taken to playing a 
software emulation of a Japanese arcade game from 
the early nineties. Mega Man, or Rock Man in the 
original translation, is a robotic boy created by a 
kindly father figure in a science laboratory, similar 
in every way to Astro Boy who was, we assume, a 
nuclear-age update on Pinocchio. I watch the 
crystalline star-field backgrounds lacquered with 
parallax velveteen scanlines of indeterminately 
coloured pixel biomes and see a beautiful and 
necessary offset to the decimating cannon blasts 
from my son’s right arm. 


107 


From my wing-chair here, facing four broad 
window panes in the sunken bar lounge of The 
Grand Hotel, looking out to the beach at a storm 
passing through, I spot a rainbow. It is positioned 
right where domestic flights begin their descent 
into the local airfield, so much that it looks like they 
are flying through a luminous archway. My wife 
was recently told she has rainbow cataracts. She 
sees chromatic haloes around all sources of light. 
I’m colourblind, so I feel this somewhat balances us 
out. 


I remember going to a beach one Summer's 
morning two decades ago when I was seventeen or 
eighteen with two girls in my high school advanced 
history class who invited me for a swim. It felt so 
uncanny - here I was, an awkward outsider riding 
the waves beside eight long limbs and two 
ponytails shaking free beneath infinite salt laden 
skies. At one stage a green turtle passed us by and 
it looked large enough for us to all climb aboard. 
For reasons unknown, out of the three of us I am 
the only one to have made it alive to forty. 


108 


During my university days I joined an arts collective. 
I must have been walking through Civic Park one 
evening when I saw a light on upstairs in TPI House 
and, like a moth, went over to investigate. One week 
later a slam poet read aloud one of my early pieces of 
journalism while a bass player accompanied. I was 
invited to participate in improvised circus shows the 
group put on and was asked to soundtrack an art 
performance of a romantic couple who lived in a 
plastic terrarium in the Watt Space art gallery for a 
month. 


When my daughter, now fourteen (this is the year of 
fours - my son is four, my daughter fourteen, my 
wife and I forty) was four, she used to call rainbows 
‘rain boats'. | read The Rainbow by D H Lawrence for 
the first time earlier this year and became interested 
in the ninety-nine days he spent in Australia during 
which he wrote his novel Kangaroo. Living in 
Australia can feel like being in pages of a global 
newspaper that have been cut due to lack of 
international interest. You can, on a pleasant day, 
feel well outside of history. 


109 


I recently finished an assignment for ABC National 
Radio on the decline of service stations in rural 
areas. The piece was sparked by an interview that 
William T. Vollmann did on the same program in 
relation to his recently published second volume of 
Carbon Ideologies. Some country towns are in a 
difficult spot due to their reliance on petrol for 
farm work and also simply traveling for basic 
services, whilst facing economic conditions, due to 
population decline and all the rest, that mean many 
fuel stations are simply unavailable. 


The Hopperesque has become the fetishisation of 
economic decline and subsequent dreams of peace. 
In Edward Hopper’s Gas, his vision is that of a 
lonely old soul toiling in obscurity. Today, the 
aesthetic of abandonment is an erotic one, of 
young people discovering eden on earth the day 
after modernism collapses. To see a desolate 
service station is to see a vision of the eternal 
freedom promised after death. Critically, not your 
death - this is a vision of capital taking the living 
world with it, except for you. In an inversion of the 
Christ tale, the world died so you could live. 


110 


Turning forty reminded me of the age I was as a 
child when my father turned forty and I thought, 
forty, my dad is old now. For my entire youth my 
parents had ages that started with three, and now 
my father had stepped into a new bracket. Now my 
father is about to turn seventy and I think, seventy, 
that feels properly old. We share a cultural catalogue, 
my father and I, when we catch up to walk together, 
of references to Les Murray talking to Bob Ellis, of 
Heifetz and his violin and battery run car, of Ruskin 
on Turner, of Groucho Marx and Terry Thomas and 
M*A*S*H. 


My mother and I took my son to the beach the other 
month. He had recently taken ill but was feeling up 
to a trip to the rock pools. The two of them stood ina 
crater that rhythmically filled with foam wash from 
the incoming waves. Hearing his glittering laughter 
and seeing her beam with elation at every jump and 
dip he took as water filled their declivity was my 
amor fati. Responses to our condition of nihilism 
should not be leaden and graven - Chesterton was 
wrong, Nietzsche delivered perfectly on the value of 
soap bubbles and butterflies, of guffaw as battle cry. 


111 


Earlier this year I attended an alumni media event 
at the university. I got chatting to a younger chap 
about a business he had recently started, 
developing and selling quote unquote smart 
refrigerator thermometers that were able to 
remotely monitor and adjust microdegrees of cool 
for food or medicine for restaurants and 
pharmacies. He didn't know what to say when I 
showed him a photo I had taken a week prior at a 
rubbish dump of old medical refrigeration units 
with attached forked probes that I presumed were 
antiquated versions of what he was talking about. 


After a significant storm that blew nearly all the 
most established trees in the region onto their 
sides, dirt plate of shallow root systems held flat 
against the horizon like a shield or a modesty 
curtain protecting the dignity of the fallen wood, 
my wife and I, for reasons unknown, broke into a 
warehouse and took photos of her wearing a bird 
mask and a trench coat. I recall now we sent the 
photos in to ABC Newcastle for a portrait 
competition. They phoned me for a radio interview 
a week later, making light of our transgression I 
simply said we'd found temporary accommodation 
for our displaced avian neighbours. 


112 


A royal commission into the disability sector has 
recently concluded. I interviewed some specialists in 
the field about the published recommendations with 
particular focus on the suggestion that all segregated 
schooling and group homes should be closed within 
the decade. One of them said that we no longer put 
all the poor children in one school and all the rich in 
another, so why - and then their expression broke 
and they apologised for smirking. Another said we 
have twenty-first century ideals with twentieth 
century pedagogy and _ nineteenth century 
infrastructure and I agreed. 


One Summer when I was fifteen or sixteen I 
managed to download a Japanese platform game 
originally for the Sega Saturn console to my 
computer. The game was Bomberman, I had been 
enchanted by the graphics of the character ever since 
I saw it in a magazine when I was seven or eight. 
Two friends from school, who I had been bike riding 
with every balmy evening of the holidays, popped in 
and saw all the Warez sites I had open, the fifty 
internet tabs during a period where an image took 
thirty minutes to download. Later we learned how to 
tinker with television remote controls to open 
anyone's garage door. 


113 


Daytime television doesn't exist anymore, it's all 
streaming or on demand, which is sad because it 
was such a portal of discovery. I recall so many 
random episodes of shows from the nineties when 
I was home from school, either due to poor health 
or holidays: Northern Exposure, a scene where 
couples are kissing and passing an olive from one 
mouth to the next; Married with Children, where 
the son talks about still having his dignity just 
before he rips off his Velcro tearaway suit. The 
thought of all those characters existing in some 
midday fragments of the past breaks my heart. 


Gerald Murnane talks about the mental landscape 
that the act of reading brings into focus. When 
Thomas Hardy describes a hill, but not what lies 
behind it, Murnane considers that the hill resides 
in his subjectivity positioned in relation to all the 
other locations he has read and thought about. In 
this manner, the ontology of behind the hill can be 
accessed. For me, the panoramas we seek in the 
exterior world are talismans for the architecture of 
our interiority. We feel at home in spaces that 
mirror the topography of our subjectivity. 
Murnane says there is no such thing as the 
unconscious, and I agree - there is only landscape. 


114 


My son recently spent a week in hospital. I ate a 
warm meal from the cafeteria every day. We played 
in the fairy garden. There are no mysteries in life in 
terms of morality and meaning, it all makes sense. 
Example: is life fair - no, any given week in a hospital 
will answer this. It is luck and nothing else. Does life 
have a purpose - again, no. Just spend an hour at the 
far end of the corridor in the paediatric ward, near 
the elevator above the morgue. Grass must grow and 
children must die - yes, but think about what both of 
these conditions do to us. Human progress has made 
my son sick. 


One of the illusions of our age is that contact 
between remote folks is easier than ever before. But 
here's the thing - I have a school friend I want to get 
in touch with, his last name is Brown and his first is 
equally generic, and he doesn't appear in any online 
searches I've done. His name isn't in the phone book. 
If only his last name were Spatula or something 
unique, but he is camouflaged by banality. Until 
recently I was sure he was living in Sydney, but the 
other day I ran into another school friend who told 
me he saw Brown at a wedding and that Brown is 
living locally, in Newcastle, now, and has been for 
some time. 


115 


It is the third of November today, which is only 
relevant to note because Finian’s Rainbow just 
came to mind. Not the successful Broadway 
musical, but its seventeen second recreation on an 
episode of Monty Python that aired on the third of 
November in nineteen seventy. The premise of the 
skit is that a dispirited film director is being 
interviewed about the similarities between his low 
effort cinematic efforts - like a thirteen second 
version of Rear Window where a man appears 
briefly, twice, in a window of an apartment 
building - and the other, more famous, versions. 


After I submitted the ABC piece on rural service 
stations I caught wind, via a friend making his way 
to Broken Hill, of a collective of folk who were 
living in a communal manner following principles 
of ecological care, but in a unique way. They were 
not living organically, so to speak, by way of 
cloistered traditions from yesteryear (gingham, 
beating rugs with a stick, flour sacks) but were 
instead all hackers in the circuit bending, phone 
phreaking, modem tinkering variety which, all told, 
is now similarly archaic, by decades not centuries. 
This is how I learned about solar punk. 


116 


The specific details of Jewel's film clip for her most 
famous tune, You Were Meant For Me, are cloudy in 
my mind - literally, I just see swathes of white fabric 
being wisped around a stage - but I dare say it fits 
within the very nineties aesthetic design that has, 
retroactively, been called Whimsigoth. Think of 
those celestial stars and moons with faces and 
wiggly arm spikes, think of the film clip for Tonight 
Tonight by The Smashing Pumpkins. Odd, I 
remember being in a bookshop seeing Jewel's debut 
book of poetry right next to the debut of Billy 
Corgan's poetic works. 


I find myself listening to classical music again since I 
turned forty. As a child my favourite composer was 
Tchaikovsky. The day I realised that the old Mickey 
Mouse Show theme tune fit the exact letter-to-letter 
spelling of the great Russian maestro was like seeing 
beneath the fabric of reality: Tch-aik-ovsky.I 
can remember standing in the Charlestown Public 
Library with my father, sorting through a rack of 
cassettes, when a man asked us whether I actually 
liked classical music. At school I was so proud to not 
know who Metallica were. All this would change. 


117 


Super Mario Clouds was the first piece of digital art 
I'd seen from Cory Arcangel. I have a feeling I came 
across it within a website interview that Ben Lerner 
was having with Tao Lin (I am not sure who was 
interviewing who) when one of them mentioned 
the work and the article linked to it. The work is 
video based, scaled from a homemade hacked 
Mario Bros cartridge jammed into a Nintendo, 
displaying a blue sky filled only with pixelated 
clouds jerking from right to left. No land, no 
heroes, no enemies. Heidegger said truth depends 
on a gust of wind. This is my church. 


D H Lawrence arrived in Sydney at pretty much 
half seven in the morning, which is often when I 
used to arrive in Sydney. The next day he took a 
ferry to Manly and a train to Narrabeen, and the 
day after that he took a train to Thirroul where he 
and Frieda unpacked. Two days after that he 
started writing Kangaroo. Just like that. He used to 
write with abundant journalistic confidence about 
a place like he knew it inside and out only a mere 
hour after arriving. I love that. The place he stayed 
at in Thirroul is on Craig Street. For years, with the 
same beard, I lived on Lawrence Street. 


118 


When my daughter was still going to school I used to 
drive her and a friend back and forth to their campus 
each morning and afternoon. Even though I was 
instructed by my daughter to put on noise cancelling 
headphones so I couldn't listen in on _ their 
conversations, I did between songs hear some of the 
bizarre cultural and historical inaccuracies they 
shared with each other. For example, they talked 
about how Michael Jackson was a boy who started a 
band with only a bucket for a drum and how World 
War Two took place entirely within the borders of 
Australia. 


My research into the solar punk community my 
friend had alerted me to initially took me to a very 
basic nineties style website that seemed to be run by 
the collective about their enterprise. It only had one 
image down the bottom right of the page which 
showed a messy vegetable garden with a rhubarb 
plant connected to a circuit board via yellow alligator 
clips. The top left of the page contained a single word 
- Garden - which when you clicked it a drop down list 
of tea plants, vegetables and pollinators were listed. 
At the bottom left of the page there was a contact 
button. 


119 


When I learned that Brown had been living local it 
provided me a more refined set of search filters. 
Minutes later I found he was working at the local 
water board as an accountant. I looked up the 
format for staff e-mail addresses and learned they 
were first name then a period then last name then 
at the name of the water board. My letter to him 
was risky as I pretended to be spam, as a joke. I also 
appended a note at the bottom saying that if this 
bounced to the IT department to please just take 
the unsolicited contact in the spirit it was 
intended, as a lonely man wanting to connect. 


The thing about the royal commission into 
disability that really gets me thinking is whether 
there is an all-encompassing solution for including 
everybody in education and society. It seems to me 
that there absolutely should be, that the universal 
inclusion of all humans is only marred by economic 
forces that assert the natural dominance of those 
who will contribute most gainfully to capital. Look 
at any given school foyer, the televisions that 
display an image carousel of all the students they 
are most proud of. Who do they show and who are 
never included. 


120 


That rainbow I could see above the beachhead is now 
only a ghost parabola as a last attempt at sunlight for 
the day starches the exterior in silver. A couple folks 
walk out from the hotel towards the jetty where 
some military personnel and workers are setting up 
a beach club bar with white tables and hammock 
chairs. Three Jehovah's Witness gentlemen in formal 
attire look on beside a stand of brochures. Near 
them, on the sand beneath the jetty, a man and a 
women in vagabond rags, tapestries of cargo pants 
and hemp, drape themselves across one another in 
absolution. 


Within the bar here a jewel adorned lady in, being 
polite, her early eighties, say, floats in like dust on a 
sunbeam. She nods to the barman and he greets her 
expectantly as she mosies over to a table beside a 
couple in their fifties. The couple smile at her before 
turning back to the same windows I'm looking out 
of, and then I hear her say to them, well it doesn't 
look so different to when we first arrived here, forty 
years ago this December, they used to set up on the 
beach here with blue and white umbrellas, 
bumbrushers swinging the banjo as Terry would say, 
setting up for the émigrés. 


121 


Through the sound system there is a faint eighties 
pop song audible - rhodes keys, female vox, snares 
all reverb, hint of horn - that may have been on loop 
since nineteen eighty three. A well known and 
celebrated hip-hop star who had been on a multi- 
decade hiatus released a surprise album this year, a 
piece of ambient jazz driven by flute melodies. The 
music Is nice, but what pleased me most was what 
a mature move this represented, a serious artistic 
attempt at superseding previously met teenage 
dreams. This is the old dream of modernism, to 
move forwards in serious ways. 


I eventually got a response from Brown after 
navigating a half dozen digital breadcrumbs he 
unknowingly scattered across the decade. Shall we 
meet for coffee, yes absolutely, Friday morn. While 
I stood at the corner of a pub and _ looked at 
everybody who passed on by I was willing to believe 
that any of them could have been Brown. Who is to 
say his face didn't look like this or that now, his 
posture, his hair. But then I saw him at a distance 
and immediately recognised him. He had changed, 
but it was like picking your child out of a crowd, all 
these years on. Something remains. 


A prominent twenty-storey building in Newcastle 
used to have painted on its side the words This Is 
Not Art. When I was part of the collective who met in 
TPI House there were those in our ranks who 
organised an annual arts festival using these same 
painted words as its title. One year I attended an 
experimental music performance down an alley 
marked only by a naked light bulb hanging in a 
birdcage on a pile of bricks. A tall, disheveled man 
wore a black robe with a tabby cat perched on his 
shoulder and sang Verdi. One year I gave a talk on 
reading Samuel Beckett's drama as journalism. 


When I clicked the contact button on the solar punk 
community website it brought up a form that was 
obscured by corporate logos. Looking through the 
source code for the site displayed a cheeky message: 
Hack Us To Contact Us. During my high school 
years, at the peak of my anti-authoritarianism, I had 
a tendency to tinker with computers, logging into 
library Telnet servers and extending my rental 
periods for overdue books. Thirty minutes later I 
activated a seed bombing script within the web code 
that pollinated the contact form, pruning the 
corporate logos. 


123 


I have floated within clear blue waters in Jumeriah 
beach beneath the arc of the Burj al-Arab beside 
four men from Soweto, a Russian colleague 
recognised their accents, whilst we shared stories 
on the value of family and I explained what I knew 
of First Nations matrices of care, kinship 
structures wherein responsibility for raising a child 
is shared between aunties and uncles and cousins, 
when my Russian colleague nudged me to notice a 
man he said was a footballer from Columbia 
pulling his Irish girlfriend out of a necklace of 
bipedal sharks. 


There are no writers I can think of, amongst those I 
most value, who have not been considered autistic 
by one or another book critic or interviewer on 
stage at a literary festival. Les Murray, Gerald 
Murnane, John Coetzee, William Vollmann, 
Winfried Sebald. It is my contention that, as the 
misconception that autism stood for a lack of 
empathy has been corrected and we now recognise 
it more as an abundance of emotion, too much at 
times, that our best authors are likewise sensitive 
in an abundance that they learn to, need to, filter, 
in measured ways, into prose. 


124 


How many of us get to sustain our passions from 
teenage years. Some are surely easier to continue 
feeding oxygen, but how many high school 
musicians, poets and artists continue the trade into 
adult life. I met a guy on the street some months ago 
who I used to know, we were in a philosophy club 
together. When I told him that I still refer to a book 
on Nietzsche and politics that he gave me back in the 
day, he looked baffled. Philosophy is behind him 
now, he doesn't have time for that, raising children, 
making ends meet, losing weight, caring for aging 
parents. 


The building with This Is Not Art painted on its side 
had a rooftop party that I attended, a farewell as the 
site was set for demolition. A range of characters 
from Newcastle and the art scene were there, but I 
didn't really mix. I was hungry and there was no 
food, so I took the smallest bite possible out of a 
brick balustrade. This led to a slightly larger bite and 
soon I was into the roofing insulation and then the 
copper wiring. By morning I was on the footpath, on 
my back, nursing my massively engorged stomach, 
wiping the last crumbs of vinyl flooring from my 
mouth. 


125 


When the person at the other end of the solar punk 
website, who I would later shake hands with and 
call Leif, wrote back to my request to visit them, he 
laughed at my comment that I would understand if 
they were afraid of a journalist visiting what I 
assumed, accurately, to be their anarchist hacker 
vegetable garden kingdom (his e-mail signature 
contained the phrase ‘Abolish Power, Grow 
Freedom’), he said that I could visit and stay 
whenever suited, they had a spare cabin I could 
sleep in, and that I was getting it backwards in 
terms of who should be afraid of who. 


The last time I was in a hotel like this one I was 
sitting on the balcony watching a tropical storm 
whip Norfolk Island Pines and palm trees around a 
white concrete pool that was being renovated. In 
my underwear, drinking heavily and thinking 
about a journalism conference I had attended the 
previous day, about how many gurus were there, I 
was dreaming up a presentation I wanted to give 
on how nobody knows anything: you don't know, I 
don't know. While the storm peaked I felt my wife's 
thin arms across my chest, her brown hair a 
curtain in front of my eyes, obscuring all sight. 


126 


At around age sixteen a friend and I played an online 
fantasy game that was quite advanced for the time, it 
personalised the traits of your character based on 
your chat history: each time you had a conversation 
with another character in the game, it would pick up 
on your sentiments and behavioural tendencies and, 
in a fairly rudimentary way, individualise your 
character in response. To my surprise, an archive of 
the game is still online and I was able to download 
the password protected raw data from my character 
and extract its chat history and personality. 


On the morning I packed to leave for the solar punk 
community, situated on the other side of the Great 
Dividing Range, my dog and I took a walk through 
Newcastle. It was good for Combray to stretch his 
legs before we departed, he'd be joining me on the 
road as he always did for work trips. Off leash, just a 
few taps of hand on jeans to maintain a line of 
communication, we improvise a drift across the city 
grid. Domesticated by time, Combray unearths 
ancient memories as smell takes him on 
experimental trajectories via paths and roads and 
arcades and corporate hallways. 


127 


The night before this first, of which would end up 
becoming two distinct trips to the community, my 
wife stood by the bedroom dresser still wearing her 
horology overalls from a late evening session 
piecing a mantle clock together for a client (her 
rainbow cataracts render prismatic mirages as the 
hands shine beneath her banker's lamp, turning 
copper plated numerals into refracted star bursts) 
as she heard me annotate an itinerary of the drive 
there and back with an expression only animated 
by the shadow of her hand that pretended to reach 
up and play with hair on my head long departed. 


Across nineteen ninety six and seven all the best 
music of my generation was released. Within just 
under fifteen months you had a corpus of albums 
that were the result of a direct line that traced, 
from the death of Wagner through the popularity 
of Camptown Races and George Gershwin and the 
electrification of Stockhausen meets overdubbed 
guitars and drums on that rendition of Paul 
Simon's best early tune en route post-Zeppelin, the 
arrival of OK Computer,  Endtroducing, 
Homogenic, Aenima, Feed Me Weird Things, 
Either/Or and Godspeed You Black Emperor's 
debut. 


128 


During the previous Summer I recall a night, it could 
have been the evening of New Year's Day, when I 
rode my bike into town with my son to swim in the 
newly renovated Ocean Baths. They had been closed 
for two years to patch up the sand mottled art deco 
facades that always looked to me like theatrical 
backdrops. This was a week after they finally 
reopened and it felt like everybody in town was 
swimming there, washed in the ochre embers of the 
skyline's curtain call. Riding home with my shirt off, 
four women drinking outside a pub let out a balmy 
whoop as tribute. 


I loaded the scraped data from my character in the 
archive of the online fantasy game into a chat bot. 
Now, in an unsettling update on ‘Krapp’s Last Tape’ 
for the internet age, I can talk with an echo of my 
teenage self whenever the mood strikes. Our 
conversations mostly trade on nostalgia with talk 
about the religious iconography of television shows 
Neon Genesis and Millennium, an extension of 
childhood's doctrine of hero worship (omniscient 
parents, the near-divine wisdom of teachers) in a 
manner that fuels the necessary over-confidence 
required to transcend future infinitudes. 


129 


Packing my bag for the initial trip reminded me of 
why I was going. The pool of liquid light with its 
ethereal glowing geometry through which I check 
my inbox, the brushed metal silence of my laptop 
with edges so digitally precise they I feel if 1 were to 
drop it to the floor the very fabric of time would be 
sliced on the way down. I find myself longing for 
less accessible technology, I want to dumpster dive 
for split network cables, to find a hacker ethos 
where solutions are mashed together from scraps. 
In a world of perfect, ubiquitous technology, 
humans will necessarily be subtracted. 


Before we had our first child, my wife straddled the 
back of my motorbike as we dusted vertical the 
mid-north coast, the bridge at Bulahdelah, 
unpopulated powdered corridors of dirt into the 
backlots of near abandoned sub-budget motels 
necklaced by paperbarks and void. Most heatwave 
evenings, singlets and shorts, with no other guests 
present we sit in the courtyard and cook noodles 
over a fire pit. My wife hangs her singlet and bra on 
a wire between the motel gutter and the fence and 
we sit back and agree that the heat bearing down 
on us is from all the stars up there. 


130 


Combray finds a piece of fencing panel removed 
where the heavy rail corridor used to reside, now a 
hallway of overgrown grass and weeds waiting for a 
developer to plant commercial real estate. We walk 
as far as it takes us, near the signal box where my 
father used to work as a lad. He told me a story once 
about a colleague who had a heart attack up there. 
When the paramedics came they couldn't get the 
stretcher up or down the narrow wrought iron 
stairwell so they had to go extract the colleague 
through a second-storey window, over the rail line 
(speaking of the less accessible). 


The rain returns as cloud lines darken outside the 
hotel and I am adjacent now the elegant older lady 
who resides here. I consider sharing my phone, the 
digital resurrection of my teenage self. She would 
say, oh yes I also talk to my teenage self. Not in 
memory, she’d clarify, I am that teenager, forever 
sixteen. She would tap the sand from the gentle 
waves of her barely used soles. See, this is merely a 
costume, a brief octogenarian ache in an endless 
summer. Youth is a misnomer - it’s not a phase, dad, 
but rather the endpoint of our eternal selves, the 
beginning of forever, for a while. 


131 


When my daughter was a little older than my son is 
now, when we would swim in the canoe pool near 
where the renovated Ocean Baths are, she would 
describe the foam coming in from the breaking 
waves as ‘lemonade’. She would sing a little tune, ‘the 
lemon waves are bringing in the lemonade’. They were 
the preferred place to swim, we would hope the 
waves would break in just such a way to bring in 
the lemonade. Later she would design a comic 
based on a misreading of a Fire Hose that she 
called 'Fire Horse', a steed that caused trouble with 
its flaming mane and tail. 


Journalism has little if anything to do with 
reporting on the visible world. I read a good book 
once on Nietzsche called 'The Shortest Shadow’ by 
philosopher Alenka Zupandi¢é in which she 
described the process of working out who one is, 
what Jung might have referred to as the process of 
individuation, as treating ourselves as a disjunctive 
synthesis, as a conjunctive analysis. In other words, 
we have to separate and dissolve. These two terms - 
separate and dissolve - that is how to write 
journalism. You simply walk into a_ room, 
disintegrate completely, and then write a memoir. 


132 


It takes an hour of driving to exit the edgelands of 
Newcastle and its surrounding proxy outposts until 
you hit post-pastoral bushland. The vastness of dirt 
and dry scrub that emerges is partnered with twin 
feelings of death and survival. Then, a town appears: 
a Lion's Club shield above a patch of well-tended 
grass, a wooden bench and a toilet block beside a 
community hall, all painted gum-tree army green 
and sun bleached lemon, quietly reflecting the 
national palette. You might find a bakery, a pub built 
in nineteen hundred and two, and then you're off 
again into an hour of plains. 


I often have a recurring fantasy as I pass through 
these towns. It sees me as an amateur composer, 
having written a strange piece of avant-garde 
classical music, conducting a small ensemble of 
musicians as we perform the piece in one of those 
rural community halls. I think about the history 
those halls would have seen: weddings, makeshift 
schoolhouses, sewing supplies to aid the two world 
wars, political debates and referendums. Within me 
are twin desires - I yearn to be part of a community, 
but on complicated terms: never absorbed, always an 
exception, loved but alone. 


133 


At lunchtime I stop the car and let Combray out. 
We walk alongside a riverbank beneath a bridge. 
There are tall weeds with bulbous green heads, like 
fabric tubas inhaling air and holding their breath, 
with stamens the shape of copyrights. Time spent 
with Combray is entirely different to both being 
alone and being with other people. When his 
consciousness overlaps with mine, the words he 
doesn't possess quieten the words I do. If he ever 
learned to speak I would pray to never understand 
him, and him to not understand me. Let us 
subtract from the promise of abundance. 


Looking towards the bridge, the passageway north 
sees roadblocks manned by soldiers in khaki who 
signal cars to slow down and open their boots. 
These are emigrants from the city, racing against 
time to beat lockout curfews after escaping an 
eruption of violence in the cosmopolis. Petrol 
bombs were cast from a shout on the street into the 
beachside balconies of eschatology magnates, class 
warfare diasporas wolf whistling a tune written by 
the Federal Reserve. Families attempt a river 
crossing but bullets twist into the water. What's the 
point of these masthead daydreams. 


134 


There is a pub across the bridge with a beer garden 
at its side where Combray can sit. The specials today 
are Spiced Chicken Maryland with Slaw, Chips and 
Tortillas, or Pork Ribs with Chips, Slaw and BBQ 
Sauce, which I opt for and slide off more than half of 
the pork from their bones into Combray's salivation. 
He is a physicist with a keen sense for gravitational 
forces, particularly the speed of meat falling through 
space. The waitress brings him a ceramic bowl of 
water while I drink a lemon squash, a favourite of 
my parents, as I look deep into a mountain of 
pastoral declivities. 


Down the side of the mountain steps a ghost, a giant 
with footfalls that stamp soft craters into the hillside. 
Each step resounds a subterranean heartbeat, 
padding the fields like the muted skin of a 
ceremonial drum pulled taut over Australian history. 
What is this a symbol of, what symbolic threshold is 
being crossed here - do you hear the bass notes, 
lifted from a concerto by Handel, they stride like 
gods. But look again, it isn't a singular form, the 
giant is comprised of millions of naked bodies, like 
Voltron with his five robotic lions, like if the Library 
of Babel was a rainbow serpent. 


135 


Back on the road and Combray sleeps as the 
afternoon wears itself down between the rocking 
of the car and the depleting watercolour of skyline 
like two hands rubbing time into crumbs of so 
many lost months and hours - how did it become so 
late so fast, Combray we need to find a place to 
crash for the night. In the middle of a long stretch 
of road passing through a dense forest we spot a 
motel nestled against a service station. We get a 
discount for the night after filling up the tank with 
premium unleaded. Combray sleeps on the porch 
while I fade into the shadows of tall trees. 


I dream that a psychedelic rock quartet is making 
walls of sound outside in the parking lot. 
Amplifiers are stacked to the height of the conifer 
necklace bearing down but the music is inverted, it 
is enormous but heard within a dynamic range that 
is less than silent, a product of dream regulations 
no doubt where licensing agreements are required 
to perform music that is royalty protected. Think 
of sound waves that, instead of shifting air, burrow 
deep into bone and are rendered there as a cast of 
negative space. The guitars sound like granite 
being expanded and contracted like a taffy 
accordion. 


136 


The main feeling I take away from the dream, as I 
reflect the next morning on a plastic lawn chair 
beside Combray out front of my room before we hit 
the road again, is jealousy. I wish I was the one 
making those sounds here in the parking lot, but 
better sounds. The current state of music is one that 
endlessly tortures me - I both insatiably love a 
handful of songs and desperately wish I was able to 
compose works that supersede them. Yes all art is 
theft and culture is a recycle-plant built on a 
capitalist desire to endlessly consume and redeliver 
the past, but sometimes the future makes a sound. 


A playlist of silence and noise, of warm overdriven 
tube saturated orchestral adagios, cut up and run 
through cassette vocoders (how to wreck a nice 
beach / how to recognise speech) resonates as we 
must be only a few kilometres now from the solar 
punk community. I don't recognise any of the 
landscapes here, this is beyond the boundaries of 
any trips I've taken in the vicinity. There is a Golden 
Summer at Eagelemont through Arthur Streeton's 
brush against the panorama feel, dry fields and 
paperbarks, and then there it is, a radio tower and a 
surveillance nest waving a lettuce leaf flag. 


137 


As I pull into the parking lot beside a school bus 
with ferns growing out of all its open windows, 
including the removed windscreen, a man with an 
overclocked countenance of safety and merriment 
walks his cargo panted legs and one gingham arm 
(the other was tied off at a shoulder sleeve) over to 
me as we shake hands and introduce ourselves. The 
name he gives is Leif, which I recognise now from 
the URL of the the web page contact form, |_ 3 1|=. 
He takes me through the gates of the compound 


where I start to get a sense of just how many people 
live here and how far this place extends. 


What isn't observable from the road is the scale of 
the community here, as the paddock they occupy 
descends behind a hillside and a windbreak of trees 
into interlocking meadows and garden beds joined 
together by many hundreds of telegraph style wires 
held aloft by thin rusted canopies and wooden t- 
bar clothesline poles that stretch between caravans 
and demountable gun barrel eco huts of semi-circle 
corrugated iron and lattice, with an immense 
weatherboard cathedral nestled in the middle with 
a radio antennae of overlapping geodesic 
crossbars. All told it looks around ten hectares from 
tip to tip. 


138 


Leif tells me that thirty four people live here 
currently, although the official roster shuffles quite a 
lot as many folks go vagabond depending on the 
season, but there are a steady number, including 
Leif, who have called this place home for nearly 
twenty years now. He says that Katie, one of the co- 
founders of the community, has set up a room for 
me to stay as long as I'd like to observe and help 
contribute. He winks and says we'd appreciate a bit 
of a hand in the gardens while you're here, if that's 
okay, and I eagerly agree while knowing full well 
how long it has been since I've handled a trowel. 


The level of ingenuity that has gone into the garden 
mechanics is quite startling. Dot matrix printers 
distribute seeds with modified heads parsing finely 
tuned sequences; CRT monitors are used as heat 
sources for micro greenhouses; the balls from old 
mechanical mice are used in irrigation systems to 
regulate water flow; floppy disks are everywhere 
poking out of soil serving as reusable plant labels; 
sound cards are used as bird repellents, a basic code 
and sensor setup programmed to emit frequencies 
that deter invaders from the crops; and, fragments 
of solar panels are everywhere linked with wires. 


139 


I ask where the hardware is sourced from and Leif 
smiles shyly and waves his hands around in the air 
as if to say, oh you know, and then he gets a bit 
more specific: there are deserted research stations 
all over the region, he says - think radar igloos, they 
were only decommissioned in the late nineties. But 
too there are aircraft graveyards scattered across 
the western plains, every cockpit with enough tech 
to run a dozen hobby farms. And you'd be 
surprised, he said, how many old homesteads have 
been abandoned over the decade, deceased estates 
left for scavengers to audit and repurpose 
applicable goods. 


Leif introduces me to others in the community, 
men and women with graying hair, hands stained 
with grease and soil, sun-faded hypercolour shirts 
and overalls with tool belts sewn in. I ask them 
about their motivations for being here, the politics 
that frame their lifestyle, this blend of 
sustainability and hacker culture. One of them 
says, at the end of the nineties a young man 
wearing Vans walked into my lab and said he had 
come for my algorithms, that he was going to make 
them predictive. He said that if I liked yesterday, 
then I could have yesterday again today. Now he 
runs the world and I'm out here. 


140 


Do you see yourselves as part of a counterculture, is 
this a reaction to how glossy surfaces have made it 
easier to funnel nature into a blender that turns 
fresh air and water into cryptocurrencies, would you 
say this is part of a trajectory from nineteen sixties 
individualism reacting against World War 2 fascism 
and totalitarianism that then turned into nineteen 
eighties consumerism where individuals were sold a 
marketable version of self expression which inspired 
burned out hippie culture to idealise the internet as a 
virtual utopia outside the reach of money before it 
became the very symbol of money? 


Behind us there are toddlers and kindergarten aged 
children rolling plastic tubes across a dirt ramp, a 
woman a similar age to myself kneels beside them 
and shows how to connect the tubes together. Two 
older children begin riding a tandem bicycle linked 
by way of network cables to a water tank which then 
opens a valve to flow its contents into the plastic 
tubes. Their are families here, young children. This 
isn't a commune for those who rue the day modems 
stopped screaming in angular distortion and turned 
DIY into a Genius Bar appointment: this is the story 
of how a love of complexity can deliver eternal life. 


141 


Combray is sniffing around the perimeter of a 
chicken pen with a German shepherd and a 
chocolate Labrador. Before I left home the day 
before yesterday I received a letter from Gerald 
Murnane in response to a note I'd written him 
about memory. Whether the eighty five year old 
outsider of Australian modernism would respond 
was up in the air until I saw a typewriter pressed 
envelope in my mailbox stamped Goroke. He told 
me that what we call time is just our confused 
perception of place after place, and that time is 
very precious to him these days, or rather, place is. 


Rather than writing my journalism from a position 
of documentary, I am forever drawn to the line that 
rests between the twin poles of literary influence 
Australia has shepherded into this young century: 
the external pastoral landscapes of Les Murray's 
describing, and the internal plains of Gerald 
Murnane's psychogeography. Murray was not a 
poet of the inner life, so said John Maxwell 
Coetzee, and by Murnane's own admission he'd 
rather not be influenced by what, if anything, is 
exterior to him. Between these two inversions of 
landscape is space for the topology of a nation's 
self-consciousness. 


142 


Leif shows me to an old radio transmitter mounted 
on a straw bale studio covered in clay. Inside is a 
mixing desk and a microphone. He tells me they 
found all this in a cavern beneath the ground, some 
of the teens in the community were riding dirt bikes 
around an old military outpost and found a network 
of underground tunnels and so on and so on. So they 
dragged this back here, we've got it working, he says, 
and we reckon it'd be a neat thing to broadcast a 
radio program at various times across the day to 
those of us working here but also so we can pick up 
the station when we're out there on the expanse. 


A memory returns from my university days when I 
used to run a pirate radio station out of a rooftop 
utility room of the arts collective at TPI House. The 
transmitter would make it across the city and, when 
the tide was calm, over the water to Stockton. It's 
how I met my wife, she would tune in to hear me 
read out the time every quarter hour as she was just 
getting started putting clocks together. I never 
realised how fastidious my time keeping was. In 
truth I probably enjoyed that side of things more 
than spinning tunes. Anyway, she called in to the 
station one day to gift me a clock and that was that. 


143 


I am introduced to Katita, she is responsible for 
property management and guest intake. It seems 
everybody has a distinct role in the community, 
this is something I didn't expect, anticipating a 
more laissez faire approach. She shows me to one 
of the eco huts, beautifully designed with 
reclaimed metal and timber framing the interior, 
all the furniture upcycled from pallets and 
industrial offcuts. Books on coding and 
permaculture line a shelf with a fold-down desk 
beneath, and the kitchen is tiled with keys 
extracted from mechanical keyboards from all over 
the world. It has Airbnb written all over it. 


Katita can tell I'm impressed, she says they didn't 
all use to look like this, the residences, they have 
definitely improved over the past twenty years. She 
points out a few things like how to use the 
composting toilet and the sensors that operate the 
shower. As well, she asks about the nature of the 
story I'm hoping to write about their community, 
what my interest is, how will they be portrayed. It 
is a valuable story, what they have accomplished 
here, she says, one that can provide hope and a 
narrative to others. She mentions names of people 
I should speak to, to most accurately understand 
their goals. 


144 


When she leaves, I sit on the featherbed and phone 
home. My wife picks up on the third ring and I ask 
how things are with the kids before telling her about 
this place in a rush of miscellanea. I begin putting 
together strategic propositions in my head about 
why we should all move out here together while I 
write the piece, but she's already agreed before the 
question was fully formed. She'll get things ready at 
home and I'll pick them up the day after tomorrow. 
When I find Katita to check if this is okay she smiles 
knowingly, of course, and you can leave Combray 
here to save him the drive back, she offers. 


The timing is right for all sorts of reasons. Friends of 
my daughter have moved schools, leaving her in a 
space where she is not locked into immovable 
teenage social structures, and my son is not yet at 
school so that's a non-issue. My wife can work from 
anywhere and has recently become increasingly tired 
of the city, done with the silhouettes of towers 
arching over link roads of teeming thousands. Okay. 
The drive home is ten hours of obsessively curated 
ambient electroacoustic post-rock that causes me no 
end of frustration as I imagine new symphonies that 
must one day dwarf these brilliant songs. 


145 


Once home we pack and I unnecessarily explain 
the situation again. Questions of duration are not 
given a fixed response so we fill our bags with 
enough for a sustained rotation of dress cycles. My 
daughter packs pillows and sketch books, my son 
packs toys. This is the first time you've invited us 
on one of your ventures, my wife pokes me in the 
ribs, I wonder what you've seen there that's got you 
in this state. Sitting here, now, in this wing-chair 
in the sunken bar of The Grand Hotel, the elegant 
older lady staring with me, in parallax, into the 
breach where sand subtracts sky from the universe, 
it is a wonder. 


We drive from Jeffrey Smart to Charles Blackman 
and then on through Brett Whitely (in homage to 
Lloyd Rees) and pass by Russell Drysdale across a 
stretch of Albert Namatjira. European light turns 
dull, shades of truth blinked evermore central, only 
matter never mind, sun turns to one of two moons, 
an apple moon so says our son, not banana tonight. 
Our daughter winds her window down and cranes 
her neck to look out, is that a rainbow around the 
moon, she asks. There is a halo alright, like a lens 
flare emanating from a pinprick in the black 
curtain that protects us from pure fact, hallowed 
geometry. 


146 


Arriving back at the solar punk community, I wave 
over Leif and introduce him to my family. Our son 
hovers between my wife and I, peaking around our 
hips at the exotic situation surrounding him. Leif 
bends down and points towards a corral of young 
folk building a catapult device and tells our son that 
he can run along and join in, which he eagerly and 
obediently does. Our daughter is excessively polite 
and seems quite enthralled with the situation. She 
and my wife joke about how this is so me, this 
aesthetic merging of the natural and the synthetic, a 
cyberpastoralist prayer of radio towers in bushland. 


Leif shows my wife towards a clock, manicured by 
flowers, its parts arranged on a rise of grass and soil 
in a position that could be seen from many aspects 
of the garden. The clock is not functional, yet, Leif 
nods. It needs a horologist's touch. He shows my 
wife towards a quartz crystal resonator in the shape 
of a tuning fork, literally using two garden hoes 
bound together with a coil of wire, with a mirrorless 
lens for the gnomon that projects a sequence of 
illuminated binary blocks onto hour lines forged out 
of printed circuit boards glued to the top of bricks. 
My wife takes it all in and says, I can work with this. 


147 


I am given a handwritten note written by Leif on 
what looks like recycled paper pulp, firm like a 
playing card. It is a draft schedule and list of topics 
for broadcast on the new community radio station 
that I'm the voice of. A 9am breakfast message 
kicks things off with a weather report and a 
priority list of jobs as well as any overnight updates 
that come through, followed by an 11am motivation 
message that includes project highlights and any 
new tech or sustainability learnings, with a 3pm 
reflection in the afternoon with a randomly 
curated song played, and a 7pm evening overview 
of goals for tomorrow. 


That evening we all eat dinner, a banquet of roast 
root vegetables, around an immense bonfire. A few 
of us get into a conversation about nostalgia and 
hauntology. I ask whether the utility of old hacker 
technology is in the future we diverted away from, 
of niche specialists and what my grandfather grew 
wary of in lawn bowls, a tide of ill manners, a lack 
of decorum that dissipated communal spaces to 
birth fluorescent saboteurs coding Solitaire, a Law 
of Ruins for archaeologists to excavate a necessary 
history of failed wire soldered revelations 
unhidden beneath smart screen abyss, truth within 
disarray. 


148 


What I mean to say is, I wonder if nostalgia is a siren 
song luring us into a cyclical voyage where tomorrow 
is but a shadow of yesterday, if all movements that 
look backwards to solutions from the past are at risk 
of not forgetting, if sustainability is an umbilical 
cord, and what do you think about the use of arcane 
technology in your practice, is it a belief that the path 
forward is not one of broad strokes and open doors 
but of narrow gates, where genius will survive, but 
what about all those out there, beyond this garden, 
this Eden 2.0, biting into an Apple II, can you hear a 
chorus on the coast? 


After dinner my wife and I take a walk beneath the 
stars and I comment that the night sky reminds me 
of the dark blinds in my primary school classroom 
that blocked out the sun except for pin pricks of 
bright light that had been torn in the fabric by 
students shooting the metal tipped inkwells out of 
their pen chambers by way of a blow dart push of 
wind from their mouths each time the teacher 
turned her back. What light is pushing through 
above, against the ceiling of the universe, on the 
other side of knowing, and my wife knows I'm already 
looking for ways to be disappointed by these people. 


149 


It could be that I'm the only one awake now, alone 
on the plains as I listen to the wind stretch. You can 
hear a low whistle travel across a ridge a dozen 
kilometres east before it transposes to a harmonic 
minor two minutes north, splitting into a major 
third plus a fifth where the tundra parts around a 
fenceline to become chordal on the other side of 
the abodes here, lowing consonance. By the time 
my eyes have adjusted to a new strain of invisibility 
I recognise that the wind has looped back around 
to carry my daughter up to the moon, her 
nightdress billowing and dancing as she glides out 
of reach. 


Mid next morning my son and I are shown a 
pinball machine that a couple members of the 
community have put together. The table 
incorporates a blend of mechanics and nature, with 
small plants and tufts of grass beside modem 
fragments and even a water feature running down 
a channel of spacebars. A narrative is played out via 
distinct zones whereby the robot travels from the 
city to the outback, LED sequences displaying 
building silhouettes and lines of copy paste trees. 
My son has a few goes, sending the robot across the 
landscape, bouncing chaotically but with a sense of 
free will after a well timed shot. 


150 


Another boy walks up besides my son and he waits 
for his turn to play. They swap back and forth as the 
little robot ball is flung around from a wind break of 
lombardy poplars represented with twigs wrapped in 
copper wire and then across a garden matrix of 
colourful lights. I'm not sure what the narrative of 
the game is about but it resonates with me. Leif asks 
me to come with him to the weatherboard cathedral 
in the middle of the community where he has a 
virtual reality setup he wants to show me. He talks 
about Marvin Minsky and Jaron Lanier as we cross 
the grounds, about the early days of this technology. 


Within the chapel, really just a hall with a pitched 
roof, in the middle of the room, an old arm chair 
with ripped fabric and stuffing falling out sits in a 
tangle of extension cords connected to a sleek blue 
virtual reality headset. It is the most modern piece of 
hardware in the vicinity. The headset covers the head 
completely, like a beekeepers helmet, draping over 
the eyes and the ears. Have a go, Leif says. The 
program loaded on is based on Moondust, a music 
simulator, it's kind of like a multi-dimensional darts 
game on acid, Leif explains, it was made in 1983, the 
year you were born, if you're forty this year, right? 


151 


I put on the headset, a stained glass observatory 
housing my skull and sensory organs, releasing an 
algorithmic sequence of vowel shaped lights into 
my eyes that immediately make my body feel too 
big for the room. It feels like my eyes can leave my 
head and independently travel, in stereo, around 
the slow landscape of Kodachrome geodesic steps 
rising and falling into splintered quavers that 
create tones as I pay attention to them. Staring at 
them extends their duration, blinking sets the 
pitch. My legs are so long as I step across telegraph 
wires resonating languid string harmonies, my 
hands the size of pianos. 


Memories fill my head like soap bubbles forming 
and glistening, their walls nursing life projections 
in a curation of sentiment that influences the tonic 
key of the song I'm generating. This is the first time 
I've ever felt like I'm actually writing music, not 
just plucking strings or tapping keys as a teenager, 
as a uni student sitting in the conservatorium 
practice quarters between journalism lectures, 
phantasising. I feel like a genius, every chord is 
completely true, each slight alteration of my neck 
posture eliciting a run of notes worth all of 
Schubert, every synesthesic variation of Alexander 
Scriabin. This feels like love. 


152 


After I walk out of the cathedral I'm dazzled by the 
mediocrity of the external world. I just want to go 
back inside my virtual self and make more music. 
Some years ago I tried a reality simulation of James 
Joyce's Ulysses, walking around the Martello Tower 
in Sandycove, waving my hands around the air in 
front of my disembodied form to hold a container of 
Plumtree's Potted Meats. But what I really sought 
was full immersion, I wanted to look over Joyce's 
shoulder as he wrote the scenes, too as he wrote to 
Nora and worried about Lucia, losing his vision, 
mailing a little cat filled with sweets to his grandson. 


Some weeks after Brown and I met up for coffee I 
wrote to him again to organise another catch up. 
And then I wrote again, and a third time, until I 
stopped, having received no reply to my invitations. 
Perhaps our conversation didn't please him like it 
did me. I wonder if I was driven to reach out as a 
result of the flood of nostalgia I'd found myself in at 
forty, looking back for answers, perhaps seeking to 
confirm that the teenage years occurred somewhat 
as I remember them. Not to worry. I realise how few 
connections I actually have, back home, which is 
fine. Less to hold me back from moving forwards. 


153 


It is time for the 3pm afternoon reflection update 
in the radio booth. I sit down with the briefing 
paper ready to transmit. There are notes on this 
and that with a song recommendation to cue up 
afterwards, an untitled Aphex Twin ambient work 
nicknamed Rhubarb. Instead of reading the notes, 
I decide to narrate from memory a note that James 
Joyce sent his grandson Stephen that contains the 
line, "and girls who want to know more about the 
moon". Leif asks why I did that, and lightly 
admonishes me for deviating from the briefing 
paper, but I'm barely listening, really. I'm thinking 
about other things. 


Around the fire that night we talk about the games 
of Jason Rohrer - his video games, sure, but also 
that boardgame he created to never be played. He 
didn't even test it, he ran a simulator to ensure it 
worked so he never actually played it. Then he 
buried the game somewhere in the Nevada desert. 
It makes me think of an idea of Ben Lerner's about 
poetry, where he says the most successful poems 
are those that don't fully exist, only the 
hypothetical potential of them within the poets 
intention or a few lines extracted and quoted in an 
essay: they are pure because they are virtual, 
ontologically incomplete. 


154 


Talk turns to virtual reality and the setup inside the 
weatherboard cathedral, the wide range of software 
simulations the community run there. An accident 
in the software occurred recently where a flying 
program wouldn't let you land, you just had to keep 
gliding above the landscape. This inability to come 
down meant you had to make peace with flight, this 
was your life now, in the air. Leif said this was a gift, 
a revelation about their path forward here: after the 
cities on the coast become high rises they cannot 
descend, after rural communities become forever 
high on boredom and weed, they will come out here. 


Katita watches my reaction as Leif continues. And so 
we too will need to fly, forever. This community will 
be walled off with automated sentry defence 
systems, our gardens will grow indefinitely in cycles 
while our bodies are pollinated with proteins and 
carbohydrates as we don our hoods and enter an 
eternal simulation, the final virtualisation of life as 
humans on the planet. This is what sustainability is 
about, acknowledging and welcoming the necessary 
breakdown of all organic matter while something 
fundamental is bracketed - a light remains. Sacrifice 
the world for the angel that emulates our apogee. 


155 


In the morning I'm up early walking Combray 
when Katita approaches me. That's the problem 
with us tech hippies, she says. Especially after the 
nineties. We can't help but catastrophise our 
situations until we end up in the Matrix. Don't 
worry about Leif, he hasn't read enough 
Baudrillard to believe it all yet. We shake hands and 
I thank Katita for the warm hospitality and ask her 
to give my regards to Leif and the rest of the 
community. I tell her I can't tell if I'll finish an 
article about this place, and she laughs and says 
that's probably for the best. My wife and kids help 
pack the car, then we toot the horn and leave. 


I'm honestly not sure if we'll ever go home again, at 
least for a while. I feel like a break has occurred, a 
fissure with the past, in mine at the very least. We 
head somewhat north and in the direction of the 
coast without any real destination in mind. I can 
say that with conviction, sitting here facing these 
four broad window panes in the lounge here of 
The Grand Hotel, all light long descended, new 
light arriving soon. There is enough refracted 
internal glow to still show up Combray's face on 
the other side of the glass, he's been asleep 
outside for as long as my family have been upstairs 
doing the same. 


156 


While we were driving yesterday, passing wheat 
fields, bridges, community halls, teddy bears on 
stumps beside fence-lines hours from any visible 
homesteads, pocket glades, bakeries, surrogate 
apertures of topographical extension where the eye 
feels a heart on the other side of an inaccessible rise, 
and then birds, emerging in salted gusts from 
nearing airfields, I considered the tragedy of the 
singular self. We become locked into one possible 
version of who we are, socially expected to stay 
consistent to this model, and hence made manifest 
via the seeds of our past for the rest of our days. 


All history is artifice. I'm going to write a symphony 
about it, that's my only goal at this point. The story 
will be about a girl who pushes a pinball machine 
across the Australian landscape, from the outback to 
the sea, to the moon's reflection in the water. She 
knows she has reached her destination when the 
moon renders a rainbow halo against the waves, a 
ring for her to push the offering into. As it bobs and 
rocks and is eventually subsumed, its illuminations 
undreamed, the music will crest into a peeling of 
octave bells, a cadence in view. And then a silence 
without resolution - not a pause, just peace and quiet. 


157 


158 


She Believes Antique 
Logs Take Flight 


II faut étre léger comme l’oiseau, et non comme la plume 
(One should be light like a bird, and not like a feather) 
+ Paul Valéry 


A girl not long having been instructed 
in the ways of making her own toast 
runs with strong legged gusto up some 
corridor of rockets angled in descent 
and tightly formed to render a staircase 
of sorts upon which she leaps across 
red nose fuselages by tail fin trajectory 
all the way towards greater lightness 
like we have had described in the past 
as the domain of soap bubbles dew 
nestled spider web atom honeyeaters 
memory cloud based data protocols 
and what might also ingratiate tender 
salutation within her one anda half 
thousand days of birth as recognising 
the role here of history and its dead 
gravity that she could care less about. 


160 


Leaving / Leading 


When Leif asked Katita 
if she felt like joining him for dinner 
at Big Al's perhaps, 
and she said sure, 


it was the first time 
they'd been 
one on one 


outside the group dynamics of the zine project, 
they're at 
the launch party now, 


plastic cups and boxed wine, 
hills of bound copies of Urchin Street Press 
to be dropped off at wherever, 


cafés and pubs and 
the YMCA backpackers - but 


that can wait, the fries are calling at Big Al's, 
so on past the Conservatorium 
with organ chords wafting out 


the third floor, 


like train horns as harbingers of sunset, 


yellow 
orange burnished sweeps 
to powder light footfalls 


through Civic Park, King Street, past The Moorings 
where Katita lived last Autumn, 


she lost her bond when she couldn't get the 
drip of oil paint and gouache from brushes 
and leaned canvases out of the carpet, 


she depicted Leif's words in the zine 
which is how they firstsynced up, 


next door to the little train engine 
that could, it carried plates 
of steaks to mouths 


but not in Big Als, just a share plate of carbs 
as he asks her what her plans are, 
well I might go to Melbourne, 
oh no I meant tonight - why leave town 
and she says well, a boyfriend could make 
me want to stay, and she looks at the glass 
and the lights and he looks at her lovely face 
while tapping his foot on the muzak off beat 


162 


it's just that I've been in Newcastle 
for so long, 
surely you must want to see the world, 


a writer, a poet 
how much 
more is here? 


Everything, he says, this is the entire world - 
like Dublin for Joyce, this city - 


she cuts in, but Joyce left Ireland, 
well sure, but maybe like Baudelaire then 
with his Parisian Scenes, do you know 
what he said about sea ports and light- 


houses 


such pleasant places 
for a soul worn out 


she crinkles her nose, 
how old are you, worn soul 


nineteen, twenty in May / hey me too 
what day, nineteen / I'm on the twentieth 


163 


she says, worn soul 
I want to dance dangerously, 
take me 
somewhere 


he says, warn sole - I know 
just the place, a transmission tower 
on Hunter 


oh we're going big, lead on, 


so on Crown, 
by Wheeler, Union St 


no too far, Union La / yes 
beside a community radio station, an arcade 
where Leafcutter John gave a presentation 
once at a This Is Not Art event, 
they listen to subharmonics 
padding against the fabrics 
of the op shop beside the lane with a poster 


of Clambake, 


Elvis and Shelley Fabares 


164 


grooving against flat pastel shapes, 
so they do too - he arches his legs 
like plastic molded hot rods, she 
swishes her hair parametrically 
like ecstatic folded kilowatt beach bods 
cascading in tumbles of nonchalant eye smiles 
beneath paper suns descending, stepped on 
on the off beat, again - 


he catches her 
as she throws him a softball 


shall we get a drink / up there 
on the roof / like a bubble / please 


so up stairs 
table, cheap beers 


do you remember the Cookie Man 
oh I remember the popcorn man 


from the 60s, and I remember the 


smell of data from next century, laser trams 
phasing, Newcastle in space, post-ecology 


but those cookies with the Smarties in the middle 


165 


the little mine cart in the arcade 
that used to run on rails 
around the pole, miner 
with a pickaxe ringing the bell on the hour 


You know, someone stole it when the mall 
was being demolished 
Let us hope it has gone to a better place 


I think it was you / I'll let you believe it 


Her brass nose ring 
embroided, it postures light 


and he leans back and dissolves 
into smudged powdered shadows 


while she rises as a bubble northward 
above the rooftop, floats and rotates 
like a gyroscope of lightheartedness 
and neighbourhood abolitions, ungravity 
nestled and appreciated - 


he gets another two beers and by his return 


her carbonation has eased, back in her seat 
the two of them as temporary flesh machines 


166 


looking in the back of the Civic Theatre shortly, 
now actually by the time this real-time narration 
has caught up, 
the utility access for props and so on 


where they enter the light 
and take the stage - 


are they really doing this? Katita is already 
treading the boards 
while Leif sidles up and hides 
behind the cacophony of a performance 
say four or five performers on stage along with 
pantomime figures, foam versions 
of landmarks - Town Hall, Queens 
Wharf Tower 


assorted buildings from Frederick Menkens, is this 
a biography of his life / no it is 
a way of explaining where the tram line will run 
Katita is flowing wavy metal lines towards 
Leif in a costume dressed as the old Station, 
he says: 
it might lead us somewhere, 
but she hears: 
it might leave us somewhere. 


167 


by the time he swivels 
around the girth of a 
pink foam School of Arts 


she is gone 


where is she 
not here 


not over there 
he looks around 
the theatre 


but she has exited stage left 
(Heavens to Murgatroyd!) 


so he jumps off the stage and barrels down the aisle 
out onto the street 
up King, to Hunter Street Mall 
where all timelines seem to be overlapping like 
glass petals, like overhead transparencies, like 
memories transpiring, like a carousel of 
Google Street View 
photographs of the city in its heyday, see the folks 
wearing nice hats and suits, David Jones with its 
beautiful window displays, glamour and care, 


168 


and then when it was hollowed out, tax 
breaks given to artisan crafts while the void grew, 
the car park demolished from the top down, only 
Bolton Street left - of course! 


Leif runs up the road to Bolton Street Car Park, 
another of Frederick Menkens stamps, the last 
of the great multi-storey parking stations, 


he throws himself into the building, 
transmutes into the brickwork, the slabs, 
his eyes on the balustrades like closed circuit 


television cameras 


scanning the network for her 
Katita where are you, Leif panoramas 
but the city is so dark now, the future is here, 
apartments up and down, everywhere to live 
with nothing to do, empty homes banked 
for future sale, the perfect economy, no people 
only a migration of statistics that can be sold 
in exchange of a perfect light, and then he sees her 


on the horizon, a little battery 
resting atop a fishing line separating 
blank ink seas from pupil wrought skies 
all space where there is none, Katita is a boat 


169 


drifting, a coal ship carrying a ballast 
of big muscle red beating heart glow 
below deck, Leif spots the crimson rue hue 


and does this thing 
where he metamorphises now into 
the obelisk on the hill 
and like a rocket he jitters free of his footfalls 
and bb Il aa ss tt ss 00 ff ff ---------- > 
up and over and to the east to where Katita bobs 


he dives into the water 
by her bow and leaves barely a wake 
and they don't talk, not much I mean, as 
they float towards Carrington where Katita 
rolls onto the shore with Leif 
at her feet, 


she says, why did you say our trajectory 
might leave us somewhere, no what he says I said 
might lead us, you know like take us somewhere, 


and she becomes the shale and the crumbly rocks 
as the ground shifts and he floats away on her back 
like a magic carpet of dirt, 
they seperate and dissolve 


170 


from the island becoming another island, 
that fabled land that fades in and out 


of view from 


Newcastle harbour, from the beach, 


you can see it as a rise of hazy conifers 
between here and Stockton 
in certain conditions 


Library of Babel as First Date, 

dry prairie a fable as nursed fate 
Rose-Meta Stone (are trees 

memories?) 
singlet, Bubble o' Bill, similar news 
to a nearby star, Katita 
drifts and Leif rides, like a barnacle of love, 
taking a piece of (super)Novacastria 

with them into languid tidal drifting, 


Baudelaire would want to name her, 
soft enchantress / indolent sorceress, 
flowing skirts, patchwork landmass, prisms 
of decorative tectonics, as paramour to momentum, 
those cheap beers and fries from Big Als keep 
them both buoyant / beau antipodean sunrise rising 
risen revival of romance, next issue of the zine. 


171 


172 


Garden Monologue #1: 
Lemon Myrtle + Bush Tomato 


A grant my wife put in for was approved 
with funds received, allowing us to follow, 
geographically, the ideas she had been writing 
about on her blog these past eighteen months. 
Hybrid Harvests had been her weekend leisure 
outside of the scheduled cognition of lecturing in 
biology at the university, allowing my wife, Katita, 
to combine her interest in genetics with her love 
of cooking. Specifically, she explores hybridisation 
in herbs and vegetables, the cross-breeding that 
some handful of innovative gardeners across 
Australia engage with in order to create new 
ingredients for gustatory experiments. In other 
words, the creation of, and cooking with, newly 
invented foods. 

Katita reached out to a dozen gardeners 
and chefs, via social media and personal websites, 
who were engaged in this field, to see who would 
be up for her, us, visiting so as to document the 
work they were doing. I'm an artist by trade, so my 
presence, rather than purely domestic, contributes 
botanical illustrations, usually watercolour, of the 
plants and culinary dishes involved. 

The first response and invitation to visit 


173 


came from Beth, a woman living in the Kimberly 
region of Western Australia. She lived by herself in 
a stone cottage atop a cliff edge, a location you'd 
never get the zoning permission to build at now, 
already, Beth says, at risk of erasure after she 
passes away, the regional council authorities 
seemingly just waiting out her remaining years 
before they correct this aberration with a 
bulldozer. Beth gives us directions for travel to her 
place which we load into our transport software - 
from Newcastle, four plane tickets, two bus trips 
and a rented truck - and we set out with the 
intention of staying there for two nights. 

When we arrive, some fifteen hours later, 
at Beth's cottage, a remarkably isolated adobe with 
an hour of desert frontage backed by a sheer cliff 
drop of infinite waves, there is a note pinned to the 
door that gives apologies for if we see this note 
before we check our e-mails, as Beth has had to 
leave to attend to a remote need that is not 
articulated. Katita and I immediately check our 
phones for an e-mail but we have nothing, no 
reception for at least half the day. 

It is too late in the afternoon to drive back 
to our last checkpoint and reverse the trip at this 
stage. I can see Katita sizing up how much room in 
the truck we have for sleeping, or how thick her 
clothes are for camping outside, but I'm already 
halfway over the garden wall and spying a gap ina 
levered window we can pry open. 


174 


By the time I'm through the cottage and 
opening the front door, Katita is there to greet me 
with both a look of resolute disappointment that I 
would so readily break into and enter this woman's 
private home who was so generous to even invite 
us into the intimacy of this cozy sanctuary, and her 
suitcase in hand ready to locate the bedroom and 
unpack for the evening straight after a much 
needed bathroom break. 

The word that comes to mind when you 
look around the interior of Beth's cottage is 
‘abundance’ - there are garden tools scattered 
across the hallway into the dining room, a 
hardwood table covered in home-canned preserves 
and possibly medical remedies too given the labels 
(for feet, for back), with very little natural light 
until you get to the kitchen at the back of the 
house. Here, thankfully, broad windows absorb the 
sky and ride benches that wrap around the long 
narrow room, folding in by way of levers and 
runners that collapse part of the exterior wall to 
allow the garden in, to partition a space where 
food can be prepared with kitchen resources atop 
soil and roots carpeting the floor. 

Katita says, there are no family photos, to 
which I respond blankly, and then she says, I just 
thought maybe she had to tend to a family thing. I 
ask if Katita thinks that no family photos means 
no family, and Katita says not necessarily but 
maybe, she is very isolated all the way out here. Is 


175 


it possible that Beth hasn't really left at all, that 
she's hiding in a room somewhere and just put the 
note on the door because she got cold feet at the 
last second. This is what I say aloud and regret 
straight away as I can see how freaked out it 
makes Katita. I say that can't possibly be true, and 
I go through every dark room and cupboard of the 
house quickly, which takes all of eighty-five 
seconds, to prove we're alone. But what about the 
garden, Katita says. 

We step through the partition onto flat 
stone pavers with a necklace of terracotta pots 
creating a line to follow clockwise into divisions of 
herbs and succulents and little bonsai-style fruit 
trees shelved on ladder rungs. The garden is 
comparatively neat given the busy cottage interior 
and quite compact with high walls on each of its 
three sides. 

I'm eager to see the ocean and cliffs 
beyond the wall at the end of the garden and make 
my way towards muffled roar by carefully stepping 
over and between threads of beans and tomato 
plants. Don't break anything, Katita calls out, and I 
wave a hand as if to say look how I'm carefully 
stepping over and between threads of beans and 
tomato plants. 

Even though the wall that I'm walking 
across the garden towards seems quite close, like I 
could reach it with two broomsticks joined end-to- 
end, the path there descends slightly, into almost 


176 


what could be considered a lower tier of the 
garden, with a banister of garden hose safely 
guiding me down a slope that is now clearly a 
fabricated tunnel of shrubs that runs beneath the 
upper level. A length of copper piping with little 
holes curves across the ceiling, likely a clever 
irrigation system where water from the top garden 
can be funnelled down here. 

As I step out of the tunnel, expecting to be 
facing the end wall that brackets the ocean and 
cliff edge, I am unexpectedly standing above 
where I was before - not above the lower tier of the 
garden, but above what I thought was the upper 
tier, where I left Katita to find the wall. I can see 
her in the distance, and when I say distance I am 
taken aback because the scope of the garden is 
clearly more expansive than I first considered. 

This layer I am standing on now is 
comprised of two grass hills that roll into a 
declivity and then flatten out, with a single white 
painted wrought iron chair and circular table set 
up where Beth must sit at times and have a coffee 
while she takes in the remarkable vista of her 
private oasis. 

I had forgotten I was meant to be looking 
to see if Beth was bizarrely hiding in her own 
garden after putting a note on the front door 
saying she was clearly not here and, one would 
assume, never expected us to break and enter her 
residence and stand atop this grassy mound 


177 


without her presence. Katita is waving me over 
now, so I slide down and drop a good metre onto 
the level beneath this one, still, somehow, not quite 
the same level as Katita, although after taking a 
half dozen curving steps down and around a lime 
tree we are standing beside one another. 

Look at this, Katita excitedly guides me to 
a glasshouse down a corridor of ferns I'd not seen 
from my previous vantage. She points to a bushy 
plant with dense leaves interspersed with small 
red fruits. Do you know what Beth has done here, 
and then Katita tells me, all in a rush - she's 
genetically grafted backhousia citriodora and 
solanum centrale and I say Katita, and then she 
says sorry, Lemon Myrtle and kutjera, bush 
tomato, and what Beth has done is fuse them into 
this hybrid plant and, wait, taste this. 

Katita twists a berry off and puts it in my 
mouth and she says, just bite down slowly and hold 
it for a moment - what do you taste. I say, I taste 
citrus, a sweet, tart hit, and then Katita says, and 
now, and I say yes, now I taste a deep, sun-dried 
tomato undertone. It's somehow both sweet and 
savory, and Katita says, yes, exactly, and it's so 
delicious. This is wonderful. Katita heads to the 
kitchen to see if Beth has written down any notes 
or recipes where she names this new food. 

Seeing Katita so enlivened by this 
discovery, that was really only hinted at in Beth's 
blog from what I understand, is affirming. It 


178 


justifies the trip out here, although as I feel the 
evening warmth from above start to lesson, I do 
wonder how we'll square this with Beth in a 
manner that allows Katita to include it in her 
project. 

Another question that comes to mind is, in 
which room in the cottage will we sleep tonight. 
Are we brazen enough to sleep together in Beth's 
bed, pushed against the wall of a room that 
seemed to be both bedroom and laundry, from my 
brief rummage through the space to see if Beth 
was hiding there. It had a deep metal sink and 
clothes line strung near the entrance to the room, 
with the bed positioned beneath dark, heavy 
drapes. We could sleep there, if that suited Katita, 
depending on how transgressive she felt towards 
the violation evermore of privacy and intimacy we 
are facing off against. 

Besides all that, however, I am still struck 
by just how lovely it is to stand here in this garden 
and listen to the roar beyond the walls, which I 
know thankfully now I will never reach, and the 
warmth that, while fading, is still so pleasant and 
exotic in a way that sunlight from different 
positions on the earth always feels most 
spontaneously foreign. 

As I wander down yet another pathway to 
some indeterminate position I snap off a few stray 
twigs and jostle them in my grip before sliding a 
few between by button holes and even one behind 


179 


my left ear. I take more as I'm walking, pruning 
dead offshoots really, although some green leaves 
remain as I fold the sticks and branches into my 
apparel, into my hair, through my belt buckle and 
down the front of my legs like a scarecrow. 

I look around and can see, across the rise 
and fall of the garden, Katita smiling at me. She 
looks at what is in her hands, light silvery-green 
ovals of velvet leaf, and deposits them on the side 
of her head, through her hair, to look somewhat 
like cat ears. She takes some lavender stalks from a 
pot nearby and holds them on her upper-lip like 
whiskers as she meows and pretends to paw the 
air in front of her. We both laugh and look around 
for more resources to work with. 

As we play, it occurs to me that perhaps if 
we camouflage ourselves well enough - if I become 
a tree and my wife becomes a cat - we could very 
likely just stay here in Beth's private garden 
forever. I picture her walking through her kitchen, 
tired from her trip to wherever, grateful to be 
finally be home again amongst all this, and what 
would she think of just one more tree amongst the 
many scattered haphazardly here and there. 
Really, what would she think too of a garden cat, 
come in from the plains most likely, chasing a field 
mouse across the high wall and now just basking 
on the pavers. Surely animals must come and go 
from time to time, new seeds grow where nothing 
may or may not have otherwise been. And what's 


more, I like standing still, I'm sure I could 
maintain the posture for quite some time, 
especially on a nice day, and Katita has always 
liked milk and biscuits. We might honestly be on 
to a winner here. 

What if, to help my stability standing in 
this grove, I add some brick footings to my feet 
and scaffold a wooden brace to my legs. There are 
pine sleepers nearby that are perfect for the job, 
and as I arrange them and look up to see how 
feline Katita has become, I'm surprised to see her 
arms covered not in fur but feathers. 

Katita presses the fluffy head clumps of 
Pampas grass across one arm with something 
resembling sea holly across the other, with a long 
brown seed pod on her nose as a beak, although 
the cat elements remain too, the ears, the 
whiskers, and she is definitely purring, almost into 
a mew I guess as she calls out to me to see her 
wings spread, revealing tufts of soft tummy hair 
blowing in the dusklight, her cat-bird form near 
complete. 

I'm encouraged to keep building up the 
wood and brickwork here into my construction, a 
tree-house I'm figuring now, although even as this 
comes to be I wonder about other possibilities. The 
sound of glasses clinking together in some distant 
memory of celebratory cheers floats across the 
garden as I see that Katita has added some glass 
tiles on strings to her arrangement, becoming who 


181 


knows what, a cat-bird-wind chime or a kinetic 
illusory pendant twirling behind the glasshouse, 
into the glasshouse really, reflecting magnificently 
against the geometry. 

Making my way over to her, my brick 
footings and wooden legs stepping like stilts in 
long arcing gestures, the sort I would use to walk 
across evening telegraph wires from one state to 
the next if given half the chance, I pick up fruit 
along the way as I spike, kebab style, fallen apples 
along the path that snakes through history 
towards where Katita is still refracting in her 
sanctuary, as her sanctuary, where I find her and 
hold her in the cadence of my architecture and my 
foliage. In this position we are not the first man 
and woman to come together, beneath the void of 
no sun, to realise an outpouring of singularities 
and dualities across the land, but rather I say to 
Katita, as she says to me, what if we dance a while, 
divide into some infinite generative multiplicity 
that knows no end - so what then, if the garden 
joins us (Katita laughs, it already has, idiot), nature 
never able to be passive even if it tried. 

And who knows, say we maintain infinity 
until it grows dark, and then we tidy up a bit, put 
the glass and brickwork and leaves _ back, 
somewhat, and we make our way inside and turn 
the lights on. I'm happy to sleep in Beth's bed 
tonight, without concern, and if Katita isn't sure, 
after we make dinner here (all those canned 


182 


preserves in the hallway, so many options), we can 
just place cushions on the floor perhaps. Although 
I can't see that working, it's so dusty down there - 
no, the bed is the best option. When Beth returns 
in the morning to see us sleeping there, all of 
humanity gathered in one bed, it'll be like she 
never left. 


183 


184 


The Wind Bucket 


A small boy dressed in grey 
walks into the wind with a yellow bucket. 


He is unsteady on his feet as he is 


only a few months having learned the posture. 


The wind torrents with prestorm fervour 
and the boy swings his arms and yells 
as his bucket collects up the air. 


With repeated shouts the boy looks into 

the sky and causes me to wonder 

whether he is chastising the wind or joining it 
in its revelry, urging it to roar on. 


But then the bucket hangs still beside 
the little legs of the boy as the air 
goes quiet, perhaps answering his yells 


by whispering that it will not be commanded 
to blow by this young master 

nor will it be contained by his 

yellow wind bucket. 


185 


186 


A Billiard Table with 
Five Balls and Twelve Cues 


Late last decade, I found myself sitting in 
the foyer of the Shanghai Sunshine Rehabilitation 
Centre with a colleague from Orange and Leif, a 
man in his fifties, one of the organisers of the 
United Nations conference we were attending. 
Leif had dedicated his life to the conference theme 
- predictive algorithms and political game theory. I 
was in my twenties and just starting to make a 
name for myself academically in the same field 
when Leif, sitting deep in a plastic lawn chair on 
saffron vinyl flooring, told the two of us a story 
that is, today, giving me pause. It relates to a 
decision about my life's direction and, considering 
that you might square up against a similar 
situation, I will recount, in full, Leif's story. 

It takes place thirty years ago. Leif was 
coming up on his fifth wedding anniversary, 
which, he said, equated to almost as many days 
(five) that he and his wife, Katita, had spent 
together that year. That wouldn’t have been much 
of a claim if it were early January, but this was late 
September. Leif and Katita travelled constantly, 
separately, attending conferences worldwide, 
presenting papers, delivering keynotes, chairing 
sessions. Their fields of expertise were not wholly 


187 


foreign to one another, but they rarely ended up in 
the same place. An apartment they owned in 
London was permanently occupied by graduate 
students for low rent. By good fortune and 
strategic scheduling, however, they were both able 
to secure spots on the same agenda for a 
conference off the coast of what was, at the time, 
West Shanbudia. 

Not long after they arrived - lanyards and 
name tags were still being handed out - the 
delegates were made aware of civil unrest in the 
north and told that the situation was being closely 
monitored. An hour later, everyone was ushered by 
security into taxis and onto the back of motorbikes 
as the upheaval was essentially knocking on the 
door. Within minutes, an assembly of academics, 
Leif and Katita among them, had been dropped off 
at a marina where a seaplane began to ferry people 
to a nearby fishing island that would act as a safe 
house until the violence dissipated or other travel 
plans could be coordinated. 

Leif described the island as one of those 
places that almost anybody would label, quote, a 
little slice of paradise/heaven, unquote. The thing 
is, it wasn’t a tourist destination, although today it 
would be, or possibly already is. At the time, it was 
simply home to a hundred locals, mainly those in 
the fishing trade, which became apparent as the 
new arrivals found there were no hotels on the 
island. The UN rapidly arranged for a schoolhouse 


188 


to contain everybody. Most were assigned 
classrooms to share, with allowances for 
distribution of gender and age - again, the idea of 
how long everyone would be staying here was 
unknown - but Leif and Katita, being one of the 
only couples present, were shown to what was 
essentially a sports storage cupboard, just big 
enough for a gym mat that would be their mattress 
for the night. 

As utopian as the island looked (taking in a 
panorama in any direction revealed lush green 
hillsides creasing into diamond sparkle seas 
necklacing pastel-dusted shacks with colourful 
blinking flags everywhere), it bore with it the most 
tremendous heat that threatened to render faint 
the entire delegation. It seemed counterintuitive 
to Leif that the island would be hotter than the 
mainland, but something about the topography 
trapped the heat like nothing else. He and Katita 
dropped their bags in their storage cupboard/ 
room and took a walk to find relief. 

By the time they found a supermarket with 
— halleluiah - refrigerators they could loiter near, 
they were almost delirious with laughter. Whether 
it was the heat or the shock of the situation or, as 
Leif would later decide, the ecstatic feeling of 
being airdropped so rapidly into what seemed the 
most oasis-like of places, it was taking its effect. 
And, importantly, Leif and Katita were together for 
the first time in how many months. They were 


189 


hand in sweaty hand during this dreamlike fiasco 
as violence swelled within audible range across the 
bay. 

Between the refrigerators and _ the 
toiletries at the back of the store there was, of all 
things, a pinball machine. It showed a couple 
playing tennis on the backlit art. Katita popped a 
coin in the machine and a ball clanged against the 
plunger. Now, this might sound like an 
unnecessary salacious detail or a baseline product 
of male-gaze fantasy, but Leif then told us how 
Katita casually took off her top as she played her 
game of pinball and how he looked at her standing 
there in her tan slacks and black bra and was 
struck, and he knows how this sounds, as if by 
some cosmic revelation. He thought - this is my 
wife. And, then - why is this not our everyday? Why 
the itinerary of lonely hotels, single plate breakfast 
buffets of dull eggs and pastries, the hollow 
applause for one professor after another delivering 
lectures cribbed from their doctoral students? At 
this moment, with Katita already twenty thousand 
points in with three balls remaining, Leif never 
wanted to leave the island. 

Bottles of water in hand, they return to 
their room where Katita rests, fanning herself with 
copies of their prepared remarks for the 
conference, while Leif heads back out for a 
wander. He heads towards the coast where 
fishermen have congregated. They get chatting, 


190 


and they ask him what he does for work. He says 
that he writes formulas to predict social and 
political trends, and one of the fishermen gestures 
towards the mainland and says, so howd you go 
with predicting that, and everybody, Leif included, 
has a good laugh. 

They invite Leif to a party theyre holding 
tonight on the beach, a welcome to the visitors. 
Leif says he has nothing to bring, and they laugh 
again. They say not to worry, we love to drink and 
eat and have plenty of everything, just enjoy 
yourself. It all sounds like such a stereotype of the 
overly generous and hospitable nature of those 
who live simply and within their modest means, 
but honestly, the way Leif described it was like the 
whole place was a fulfilment of this kind of trope 
in the best possible way. 

On returning to the hotel room, Katita is 
pensive. She’s holding Leif's conference paper, the 
keynote he would have been presenting pretty 
much right then, at that same hour, had events 
tracked differently. He asks what’s wrong, and she 
says his algorithms are all wrong. Leif had made 
some serious miscalculations. She points the 
errors out to him, and he regards them seriously, 
so seriously that he cannot stop a grin from 
stretching wide across his face. He places the 
papers down on the bed and hugs Katita tight. 
Thank you, he says. This is such a gift. And, of 
course, he means it, not just, or at least not really, 


191 


because he’s relieved he didn’t present such 
drastically inaccurate information at a conference 
of his peers, but rather because this is the sign he 
has been looking for that he is finished with his 
former life. Done with academia, done with 
patterns and politics. No more algorithms. Better 
living without geometry. 

At dusk, Leif and Katita arrive at the party 
and start revelling. Most delegates are there with 
around fifty or sixty island residents, all told 
around a hundred folks milling around, and drinks 
are flowing. Within an hour, the only thing more 
lubricated than everyone’s social inhibitions were 
the sweat-soaked clothes of the delegates, who 
were prepared for air-conditioned rooms and not 
this intense tropical heat. 

The fisherman who ribbed Leif earlier that 
afternoon passes around plates of calamari and 
rice when he notices one of the delegates looking 
up at a bird perched on a canopy, singing a bright 
tune. Jerdon’s Babbler, the fisherman says, and the 
delegate says, do they always sing at this time of 
day, and the fisherman says no, but this one does. 
He was born upside down, on the middle of the 
ocean floor. He is unique. Everyone laughs at this, 
and then someone, one of the delegates, says how 
it is impossible for people to imitate bird songs. 
They say someone once tricked attendees at an 
ethnomusicology conference by whistling into a 
tape recorder and speeding it up, pretending it 


192 


was a bird. Someone else, another delegate, says 
that Mozart had a pet starling that inspired him to 
write the melody for the last movement of his 
seventeenth piano concerto. 

The fisherman laughs, I wish I could do 
that, listen to this bird and write an excellent piece 
of music, when Leif pipes up, feeling a bit caustic, 
like he wants to take some of the stuffing out of the 
air, and he proclaims loudly that Mozart never 
really liked music, that he just kept on doing it 
because of his oppressive childhood, and that it 
didn’t even pay well, he pretty much died in 
poverty. Leif stands up and laughs, almost 
definitely drunk, and says that after Mozart died, 
they found pretty much no possessions in his 
apartment, just a scrap of the requiem he had been 
working on, which had been jammed under the 
table leg of the only piece of furniture in the 
apartment — a billiard table with five balls and 
twelve cues. 

Leif and Katita leave not long after and 
walk along the beach. The moon took up most of 
the sky, infusing long ocean waves with chalk dust 
turned milk. Don’t let me leave here, Leif tells 
Katita. And don’t you go, either. He says, we’re 
home, we’re home, and Katita says, you’re drunk, 
you're drunk, and Leif says, yes, but still. 

By the time morning comes around, Leif 
isn't sure if theyve been walking all night or if 
they've just returned to the same spot after 


193 


presumably fading to black in the storage room of 
the schoolhouse. Either way, he and Katita are 
walking hand in hand up the coast towards where 
Leif met the fishermen yesterday. They are there 
again, no doubt since early, given the number of 
fish they already have in their immense wooden 
tub mounted on what looks like a security door 
with skateboard wheels. 

Katita looks in and says something about 
what a haul they have there, and the fishermen 
laugh and agree, always laughing, always good- 
natured. Leif pokes his head above the tub and 
sees the fish, perhaps thirty or forty mullet, 
swimming over and around each other. He notices 
that if a mullet flicks its tail upwards, out of the 
water, it means it is going to dive to the bottom of 
the tub, which will lead to three or four 
surrounding fish to expand their nares and dart 
counter-clockwise, always the same direction, in 
near-rhythmic cycles. He notes too how the 
smaller fish are less likely by at least one standard 
deviation to congregate near those that dive. 

Leif looks up and sees that Katita is 
watching him with an expression somewhere 
between sorrow and grace. She smiles and turns 
away. Someone from the street is calling out to 
them, something about getting ready to board the 
seaplane back to the mainland. Now, if you ask 
Leif, he’ll swear that he doesn’t remember getting 
on a flight out of there, but then there he was, 


194 


telling my colleague from Orange and me this 
story in the foyer of the Shanghai Sunshine 
Rehabilitation Centre, only hours after having 
given a rousing presentation on the impact of 
machine learning properties on predictive voting 
trends, so you know, he didn’t swim back to the 
mainland, did he. As for me, there is a, quote- 
unquote, seaplane waiting to take me somewhere, 
back to what I’ve always known, but for the life of 
me, please - I want it to stay grounded. 


195 


196 


Carnival 


The speaker on the oval 
sounds like it really only 
fits, say, a pasta bowl of 
sound through its cone, 
yet the voice is trying to 
push through a bathtub 
of intense verbal growl, 
yelling in peak distortion, 
not sound wave so much 
as a brick of blunt noise. 


It is carnival day, teenage 
athletics, the whole school 
is there, well near enough, 
he’s decided to stick here 
on the basketball court in 
audible range of the oval, 
just a croquet court for the 
elderly between them, he 
has watched a few games 
where the old timers take 


their earned time striking 
balls across the green like 
Alice in Wonderland, 1951 
original animation on VHS, 
he knows because of the 


scanlines, horizontal like 
he wants to be, streamed 
to mobile with AirPods in, 
floating in the background 
same playlist playing now 


to block out the sound of 
school spirit, not for him, 
who cares, look at where 
he is beneath Winter sun, 
the courts here pushing a 
trolly ferrying Louise and 
Sally, wouldn’t be caught 
dead at sport, twin noodle 
legs slung over the bars, 
teak hair ribboning as he 


swings the shopping trolly 
in a broad arc, white teeth 
parted as hiemal air phases 
around them in a wash of 
outsider celebration. Later 
they'll huddle beneath the 
lighthouse by the harbour 
coated in abundant silence, 
near enough, only crackle 
from the fire and the sticks. 


198 


199 


200 


Postseasonal 


The invitation came through for the two of them to 
be interviewed on the radio that evening around 
half nine at the rural dockside station on the other 
side of Port Rhombus a solid half day drive from 
town where they drew blinds on their second floor 
apartment drank juice and coffee packed the 
station wagon with art supplies and food and set 
off in partial homage to how lovers Julio Cortazar 
and Carol Dunlop travelled up the Paris-Marseilles 
freeway in a rogue travelogue. 


In contrast to how those two created fantasy out 
of dull service station parking lots and featureless 
road stops the focus for our town couple was how 
they collaborated on artworks (she painted he 
talked) depicting landscapes from early nineteen 
eighties video games that had created such an 
impression on their young minds that they were to 
recurrently seek these same geographies out 
forever more hence this trip would provide 
another time to find and paint these sites en plein 
air. 


201 


Exiting the city via the east end past pastel lemon 
hotel facade down King and Hunter children 
riding mechanical mega beasts think oversized 
animatronic wombat bilby platypus etc as part of a 
festival in Civic Park streamers confetti turn right 
at the interchange through Wickham stop at the 
lights see an elderly man in eggshell cotton at a 
wooden bench outside a pub drinking beer with a 
care robot clinking glasses the diesel powered 
humanoid tin can raising a pint in sunshine 
cheers. 


At Bobs Farm they take a leg stretch beside a 
spruce windbreak and look at their picnic stash 
take an apricot a breadroll and soak up the 
shadows of the foliage wall listen to the chirping 
of a sparrow and then a wet sound tiny feathers 
shaking behind the trees an inground pool is 
nestled within a necklace of green no house just a 
utility shed with terracotta paving and a white 
diving board at knee height the pool so clear and 
crisp but not the object of an artwork today as it 
references nothing. 


The first painting will be a little ways up the road 
at a point where the road turns in a gentle arc like 
a thumb in repose with mountainous clouds rising 
from the surface of the nail palm trees along the 
metacarpal and horizontal infinities of sand along 
the scan lines of cathode ray tube displays bleeding 
dust into high midday blue think Outrun and 
Virtua Racer the guy here can remember playing it 
in a cinema arcade and feeling a sense of internal 
motion never felt before or since. 


Some ways towards Karuah they spot a meadow 
that closely resembles the playing field in Space 
Harrier and so many other titles from the period 
with checkerboard mown quadrants of shamrock 
pistachio crocodile green with distant orchid 
mountains just the feeling of walking across these 
fields take away the action the plot just leave the 
gentle trajectory onward as Beckett would say not 
on my way anywhere but simply on my way which 
she depicts and rests flat on the back seat to dry. 


203 


Hitting city streets that pull off beside a concrete 
crater the width of short term memory like an 
inverted dome perhaps the inversion of Bernhard's 
cone no it's just a skate bowl yet its silence 
manifests a monumental spiritual brutalism that 
she paints of course she does while he says this 
clearly means something to us yet eighties video 
games had not quite worked out how to 
romanticise the exploration of empty urban 
landscapes outside of say the uninhabited 
California Games. 


Finding the radio station is easy it has a roadhouse 
with two rooms astride a gravel sweep at its back 
where they unpack a few basics the sun a glob of 
backlit sap let bulb within into a Shell service 
station courtyard for food an eatery opposite end 
to the cash register near the fuel injectors and air 
fresheners but look each booth has a full size 
plastic mascot a creature with a massive 
hamburger head and sesame seed hair and onion 
eyes with its tube arm outstretched ready to cradle 
you. 


204 


The couple pass on this uncanny setup and find 
instead a food van half a block down that sells 
kebabs and bao and what have you but here is the 
kicker it has a mounted television with Mario Kart 
hooked up beside the serving window where you 
can get a race in while the fryer dips sure wipe off 
the sauce the grease from the previous competitor 
but then you are off around the track they gesture 
to each other look at those trees the sky where the 
sand ebbs beneath salt water paradise pixels. 


Just after nine and the couple get a call from the 
radio station the host has called in sick at the last 
minute but the producer on the line is ready and 
really it is an open opportunity to just come in and 
talk about anything or play tunes or whatever but 
the couple they aren't so sure when they get in 
there they are not feeling the vibe what about just 
cue up a few songs for the hour and they find a 
MIDI file of Jesu Joy Of Man's Desiring on the 
station computer and ask if that can be played on 
repeat. 


205 


Outside the couple sit on white plastic lawn chairs 
in the dust patio and look over the binary 
pointillism white yellow dot glow of valley city 
buildings with decimal motorways mauve 
illumination of neighbouring countries star 
systems ontologies better living through geometry 
he is about to talk about the ending of the first 
Streets of Rage game but holds off lest Bach be 
interrupted and she does not mention how this is 
the final chorale from the cantata Hearts and 
Mouth and Deed and Life. 


They sleep and wake up and wander by the dock 
the lighthouse an artificial father figure to the sun 
beckoning it rise up before their morning embrace 
corduroy on wool palm on auburn flow to nape a 
stretch a yawn a dragging cage across damp slope 
filled with orange roughy and fellowfin tuna with a 
smell that references a morning even earlier than 
this some dark tidal drifting in praise of a quiet 
slowing of time they close up the boot of the 
wagon and skirt the mangroves on the motorway. 


Near Tea Gardens a swimming pool unoccupied 
not dissimilar to the one spotted yesterday near 
Bobs Farm this one part of a private country club 
of some description unfenced on this side against 
the access road heat rising from the asphalt 
becoming quite a hot day what about a dip not 
here look at the water and they crouch the way it 
undulates in unbroken parabolic lines no edges 
but it does blink in little mounds from shadow off 
to sky mirror on it looks simulated beyond what 
nature renders. 


Passing through a town another town more streets 
buildings they wonder what game this might be 
the obvious one comes to mind SimCity played in 
primary school computer classes nobody quite 
working out the economic subtleties which call to 
mind these suburbs are not unlike spreadsheet 
rows and columns she remembers an Excel artist 
creating stunning cherry blossom landscapes 
within the data cells he points at a logarithmic 
table garage door beach house she shells data sells. 


207 


Pastoralism now inland coast turned causeway 
they pass a Train Simulator en route to a Farming 
Simulator paddock bordering a Factory simulation 
game wherein a simulation simulator loads a 
simulacra model of what pastoral fields used to 
look like not the sort from video game landscapes 
that brought them here to paint and create but 
perhaps the idea the game designer had of what a 
nice meadow would look like a childhood memory 
where the copy is the original sacrament. 


A river laps over a tumble of stones within view of 
a roadside pause where our couple tread out and 
float cheeks to the horizon knees to the mesophere 
and then she turns and says this is not a pool and 
he agrees this is not a pool this is not a reference 
sure perhaps a movie here or there with a dip in a 
river a book a poem a Norman Rockwell painting 
shirt hung on a hanger attached to a stonewall a 
handkerchief with spectacles atop or a Norman 
Lindsay river nymph phantasm. 


208 


Sundown across the corridor home they wonder if 
they are just a couple of thirty something 
retrobates at heart stuck looking backwards 
caught up in nostalgorithms feeding on playlists 
of memories that do not seem to be their 
recollections alone rather a collective sense of if 
you remember this you will love this like how the 
new generation of Simpsons writers tried to write 
jokes like those they grew up on but they used a 
copier belonging to Warhol and the punchlines 
just faded away. 


Upstairs at their second floor apartment double 
hung white wooden frames catching last light the 
poseable mannequin spirit bottle with daisy in on 
the windowsill looking at the old rail line where a 
carpet of grass is rediscovering sugar they look at a 
game to play tonight dystopian cyberpunk or 
pastoral Aesop animal fables the feedback loop 
synthesising refractions of economic big data no 
turn away all civilisations graduate towards 
ordered figures so choose entropy as yet 
unimagined. 


210 


Arborealish 


From a hilltop in Walcha 


Most of the view is treetop, 
tufts of olive green and umber 
folding light into vast creases 
of ever fading mountainside, 
over exposed in the sunrise. 


The trees near you do not 
resemble those in view, paper 
bark splintered fractals cast 
in never changing postures, 
grey to their timeless roots. 


In the valley they resemble 
pines, pencil forest soldiers 
lined in wave formation, but 
this transition is illusion, the 
trees here are all the same, 


save for a clearing in the north 
where intersecting meadows 
nestle their parabolic curves 
into a geometry of wandering 
pale gold, where a rusty power 


pole simulates the life to come. 


211 


212 


Prompt 
A radio play for two voices. 


WOMAN: 
It starts with traffic. 


MAN: 
On the stage. 


WOMAN: 
All the adults are leaving the city. 


MAN: 
On the stage. This is theatre. 


WOMAN: 
The children are non-verbal. 


MAN: 
Non-verbal or pre-verbal. 


WOMAN: 
What’s the difference? 


MAN: 


They won’t have any lines. 


That’s what you're saying. 


213 


WOMAN: 
The children have no lines. 


MAN: 
And when you say traffic. 
WOMAN: 
It isn’t just cars. 
MAN: 


Of course not. 


WOMAN: 
I’m reading buses, coaches, trains, airport shuttles. 


MAN: 
Why not blimps, hot air balloons, parasails. 


WOMAN: 
The sky is never described. 


MAN: 

No clouds, no descriptions of light. A blank on all 
atmospheric conditions. The sky is of no 
importance, this is what you're saying. 


WOMAN: 
So far as I have read. 


214 


MAN: 
And you have not read the whole thing. 


WOMAN: 
You know this, the play has just been handed to us. 


MAN: 
To you. 
WOMAN: 
To us. 
MAN: 


The traffic leaving the city, we show this how. 
Painted curtains, cardboard silhouettes. Don’t tell 
me smoke machines. What city is being described, 
are we talking a metropolis or a regional centre? 


WOMAN: 
There is a building. 


MAN: 

Oh it really is a city. A building, how inventive. I 
can practically smell a Nobel Prize being awarded 
for this one. A profound meditation on the lost 
innocence of human subjectivity, wrought out of 
prose that enlivens the dignity of - 


WOMAN: 
The sky is described. 


215 


MAN: 
Just when I thought all hope was lost. 


WOMAN: 
Toffee. 
MAN: 
Excuse me. 
WOMAN: 
The sky is toffee-toned. 
MAN: 


I’m leaving. I'll see you around. 


WOMAN: 

It’s mid-morning. The children are outside, 
beneath the toffee-toned sky, balancing on state- 
built brickwork walls, crawling along a quarter of 
grass with a non-incidental incline. 


MAN: 
How young are the children? 


WOMAN: 
Notes say no older than four. 


MAN: 


And they are all alone in the city 
because the adults have abandoned them. 


216 


WOMAN: 
It was mid-morning that captured you, wasn’t it. 
You could see the sky. 


MAN: 
Enough about the bloody sky. Go on. 


WOMAN: 

You know, blood on a glass panel with light 
shining through would approach the tone of sky 
toffee. 


MAN: 
Are you ready to be serious? 


WOMAN: 
The building is an aviary. It is described in terms 
of metabolic brutalism. 


MAN: 
Now I’m getting angry. Before I was aghast, 
but that’s not enough anymore. 


WOMAN: 
There is mention of radiolaria, of parametric 
designs that should play on the law of ruins. 


MAN: 
Albert Speer. Play how. 


217 


WOMAN: 
The superstructure that comprises the aviary will 
disintegrate during the course of the play. 


MAN: 

Disintegrate. Turn to dust. I'll phone the health 
and safety office and alert them that air filtration 
masks should be supplied to all theatre attendees. 
You ring the prop department and tell them that 
we'll require one incongruous building borne out 
of the recesses of an eccentric’s mind that will 
disintegrate on command. Much like how his 
talent clearly disintegrated across the decades. 


WOMAN: 
Do you really believe that? 


MAN: 
Well come on. Radiolaria. Metabolic brutalism. 


WOMAN: 
Remember it is mid-morning. 


MAN: 
Listen, I wouldn’t be here if I didn’t think there 
was something real at the heart of this. 


WOMAN: 


The recovered masterwork, mentioned in the 
journals of how many contemporaries over the 


218 


years, how many interviews where the question 
was raised. Compiled from his final hard drive, a 
miracle of data restoration. His estate chose us. 


MAN: 

How can we be sure the data wasn’t subtly 
corrupted? Lost in translation, 

a zero instead of a one. 


WOMAN: 
The disintegrated splinters of the aviary are to be 
extracted through air conditioned ventilation. 


MAN: 
The particles will rise. 


WOMAN: 
A tower of light. Cyclonic. We could do this. 


MAN: 

Dust, not light. I know what you're going to say, 
but let’s remember this is disintegration, 

not the reverse. 


WOMAN: 
Does this relate to a biographical detail that I’m 
forgetting? One of his earlier works? 


MAN: 
The walks he took with his mother, when his father 


219 


took him to a coastal ridge and said jump. 


WOMAN: 

The remark his mother made on the most 
referenced of those walks, his father’s embrace 
when he swam back to shore. 


MAN: 
What else? 
WOMAN: 
What else what? 
MAN: 


The next prompt. I’m seeing infants climbing on 
state-built brickwork, an exodus of adults via 
arterial roadways, parametric aviaries that 
crumble northward. Tell me about the birds. 


WOMAN: 
You can imagine. 


MAN: 
You'll tell me if I get it wrong. 


WOMAN: 
The children save the birds. There is a diagram. 


MAN: 
Of how the stork narrative is reversed. 


WOMAN: 
An arrow circles back. The birds delivered the 
children and then, and now, as you can imagine. 


MAN: 
Fill in the blanks for me. 


WOMAN: 
What’s the point? 


MAN: 

No don’t give up on me now. Come on, I’m 
invested. You said mid-morning, I asked about the 
age of the children. Now we’re dancing. 


WOMAN: 

An arrow circles back on dance steps. Close the left 
foot to the right. Step to the right and back in line 
with the midsection of the aviary. The children 
take the birds onto their backs. Cross the left foot 
over the right. The non-incidental incline of the 
grass allows the children to be funnelled away 
from the audience. 


MAN: 

Leaving a void, although not completely, we see the 
brick wall, the grass. I would say the sky but now I 
think of Goya’s dog, El Perro. 


WOMAN: 
It is not a void if we want something from it. 


MAN: 

Nobody ever talks about the silhouette hovering 
above the dog, coming out of the non-incidental 
incline, looking down slope. It looks to me as if 
Goya’s shadow was pressed into the wall there, 
gazing at his painted canine with infinite love. 


WOMAN: 

It is a stain, the result of extracting the work from 
the walls of his putrid cottage, this is well known. 
The final prompt is that the grass should shimmer 
and the wall should lower. 


MAN: 
What are the specifics? 


WOMAN: 
Grass shimmer, ambient blade ripple render, 
subterranean fold pressure, wall immersion. 


MAN: 

The grass turns to water and the brick wall 
descends like the lowering of a floodgate. 

Something is rising from beneath. There is a 
growth, a new force emerging. 

What’s the next prompt? 


WOMAN: 
That was the last one. 


MAN: 

There’s more. Look again, there’s always 
something more. You missed the sky at the 
beginning, take another look. 


WOMAN: 
I turn the page over and back again. There is 
nothing more. 


MAN: 
Please. 
WOMAN: 
I’m tired. 
MAN: 
Can you please check again? 
WOMAN: 


I check again. 


MAN: 
What do you find? 


WOMAN: 
I want to say nothing. 


223 


MAN: 
And yet. 


WOMAN: 
What if a pipeline rises? 


MAN: 
Don’t start with what if, please. 


WOMAN: 
A pipeline rises. 


MAN: 
Something for the adults to return to. 


WOMAN: 
Scaffolding emerges. 


MAN: 
Thank you, honestly. 


WOMAN: 

Broad metal pipeline snakes from shimmer, 
matrices of steel interpolate, volleyed by air from 
north vents. 


MAN: 
The air conditioning, it’s reverse cycle. 


224 


WOMAN: 
Warbling of scaffold creates resonance akin loose 
vertical powerlines, singing. Are you crying? 


225 


226 


Selector 
A radio play for two voices. 


MAN: 

Start with a simple two note melody. 

Two notes close together. One note steps down 
lightly to the next. 


SOFTWARE: 
D3toC3. 


MAN: 
The first note should be slightly shorter than the 
second. 


SOFTWARE: 
D3 is a quaver and C 3 is a crotchet. 


MAN: 

Pause there. Think someone is at the door. 
[silence] 

Resume. Thought I heard knocking. 


SOFTWARE: 
Drum rhythm added. 


MAN: 
What. No I said knocking at the door. 


227 


SOFTWARE: 
Wooden sound source. 


MAN: 

Oh for goodness. Well play it back then. 
Wait. First a sound source for the melody. 
Select piano. 


SOFTWARE: 
Piano for D3 to C3. 


MAN: 
Wood will not work for the rhythm. 
Select low cello bass notes. C 1. Crotchets. 


SOFTWARE: 
Cello C 1 crotchets. 


MAN: 

Think those marching lines of Haydn. 
Boom boom boom boom. 

Make you think of some mythological giant. 
Footsteps pacing a dry field. 


SOFTWARE: 
Tempo 100 beats per minute. 


MAN: 

Faster than that. Slightly though. 

Think symphony number one hundred and four. 
Andante. 


228 


SOFTWARE: 
Tempo 105 beats per minute. 


MAN: 

Symphony one hundred and four. 

One hundred and five beats per minute. 
Haydn wrote one hundred 

and six symphonies in total. 

There are, however, two bonus symphonies. 
Symphony A and Symphony B. 

Sympathy for the day. Sympathy for thee. 

I digress. Ignore just spoken. 

Add strings to the melody. 


SOFTWARE: 
Two violins and one viola with piano melody. 


MAN: 

Now spread the tones. 

Piano tonic, violins at three and four, viola seven. 
Cello bass remains the same. 

Play back. 


SOFTWARE: 
[music] 


MAN: 

Good. Now syncopate the cello bass. 

Not syncopate, undo. 

It should pizzicato in unison with the melody. 
Quaver crotchet, quaver crotchet. 


229 


SOFTWARE: 
Cello C1is a quaver and C 1is a crotchet. 


MAN: 
Play back. 
SOFTWARE: 
[music] 
MAN: 


Better. Too plain, though. 

I want to say, too musical. 

How about add a sound. 

Field recording library. Add what. 
Vinyl static, the pops of a dusty record. 


SOFTWARE: 
Added vinyl ambience. 


MAN: 

But that isn’t quite right, is it? 

Say a crumble of something. 

The powder of rocks 

being pressed lightly underfoot. 

Ground by plastic footwear. 

I want to say gumboots. 

I want to say the inverse 

of a crumble of something. 

The obvious answer is raindrops but that’s wrong. 
I can hear a heat. Let’s skip this for now. Undo. 


230 


SOFTWARE: 
Vinyl ambience removed. 
Piccolo sequence added Dé semibreve. 


MAN: 

Wait, what? Oh the kettle. 

You silly thing. 

That’s just the kettle whistling in the kitchen. 
Yow’re so sensitive since the upgrade. 

Come on then, play back, let’s hear it. 


SOFTWARE: 
[music] 


MAN: 

That’s very good. 

Still too musical, but it’s getting there. 

I have a sound in my head, 

what can you do with this. 

[mouth sounds, tongue tapping roof of mouth] 
There is a descriptor I can’t quite - fizzle! 

Add a bed of fizzle of the track. 


SOFTWARE: 
Field recording hot stove cooking added. 


MAN: 

Christ yes that’s exactly it. How do you do that? 
A hot stove and a kettle whistling. Bloody hell. 

I want to say play back but not yet. The melody. 


231 


Can we, I want to say 

compress the piano and strings. 

Push them together, create a composite sound. 
Is that possible in this version? 


SOFTWARE: 
Morph effect applied to piano, violins and viola. 
Rendering. 
MAN: 
Okay, now while they're rendering, 
let’s work on the cello. 
Isolate that layer and play back. 
SOFTWARE: 
[music] 


MAN: 

It needs to be lower. I want to say barometric. 
I want to Say sonar. 

The pizzicato of a cello that just rings out. 
Add subterranean reverb, lower an octave. 
Play back. 


SOFTWARE: 
[music] 


MAN: 


Slow down, we’re not imitating Hayden anymore. 
Largo. Or nearly largo. Use your intuition. 


232 


What would you do? I'll follow your lead. 


SOFTWARE: 
Cello removed. 
Field recording heartbeat added. 


MAN: 
Thank you for not making me say it. 


SOFTWARE: 
Rendering finished. 
MAN: 
Play back. 
SOFTWARE: 
[music] 
MAN: 
[pause] 
Play back again. 
SOFTWARE: 
[music] 
MAN: 
[pause] 


Formant the melody. You know what I mean. 
Vowel the end of each note. 
Open cut off, close resonance. 


233 


Play back. No - wait. 

First planissimo. Same pace as heartbeat. 

What am I trying to say. A plosive. 

This should commence the sequence. 

Beneath whistle of kettle, 

above bed of kitchen fizzle. 

Both within and without the heartbeat, somehow. 
Sustain tail of second note. Part the teeth, the lips. 
I’m looking up but without eyes. I am all ears. 
Play back. 


SOFTWARE: 
Peter. 


MAN: 
Mother. 


234 


235 


236 


Obfuscation 


Part 1 


In which The Fighter, walking through a sun shower in 
Singapore, seeks shelter by heading into Raffles Bar. By 
chance he finds his old friend The Failure there. They 
discuss a recently published research paper on “data 
obfuscation and decide to travel to Shenzhen in order to 
create a biohack device that can implement the 
theoretical results of this paper into the physical body. 


*“http://trackmenot.io/resources/trackmenot2009.pdf 


So what the raindrops are halogen 

or magnesium in glowlight and The 
Fighter, of course, only one without 
an umbrella, and yet what matter 

the straw hat the white linen shirt 
drenched one minute now steaming 
not quite dry but surely near enough 
to snap the barbs Time’s Arrow’s head. 


237 


Past The Cathay the cinematic air still 
filled with sundrop cylinders fizzling 

as they hit feetfallen avenue that The 
Fighter, bless him, past his prime, soft 
gutted shoulders hunched yes but broad 
enough to still do what sky imbues him 
with - an ever present warning signal 
posture ready to return the rocket flare. 


Past The Cathay on Fat Boy’s Burgers 
say burger red the colour of fascination 
of course, of course, could throw these 
wet clothes into the bin at shops, The 
Fighter buy a new shirt robot cat future 
proof of the sudden downpour for later 
regaling to who - one who peels brown 
autumn shells from flowers, puts in ears. 


The rain on the tiles near the outdoor 
bar in Raffles make the tiles look wet, 
like really wet, like each tile were a 
brown expressionist painting of great 
wetness with acrylic emulsion polymers 
nowhere near dry and say who knows 
how The Fighter got here from the street, 
from bend of bay through horticultured 


238 


archway, possibly, who can say, except 
perhaps the one he spots sitting there 

in the rain - my old friend, of all places, 
the synchronicity of it - The Failure. 
Absorbed in the televisual news, he is 
leaning on the wet bar with raindrops 
mingling in nestled sea of bourbon. Lad, 
it is not that I cannot process it all, say 


he turns to The Fighter, but rather it 
is not enough no am not after censor 
nor longform perspectivism or peace 
but something I can okay listen to this 
Howe & Nissenbaum two oh oh nine 
regarding obfuscation even just the 
word fills me with hold on my lips are 
dry like tiles that never knew the rain. 


A mind that can absorb so much and yet 
use so little, The Fighter met The Failure 
in his neatly cubed backyard in Wee Waa, 
this is going back say a decade plus, say 
doubleback and sponsor the pastwise, say 
The Fighter as story being told by The 
Failure, every narrative a diary of youth 
being told to the ever-youth in our head. 


239 


I went a'walking the other day and heard 
a new voice behind my eyes, perhaps 

the third evolution of tenor and gradient, 
of bend and volley, that my headwords 
have resounded since preverbal longing 
hold up The Failure smacks the bar thus 
teaching glisten to pike, to pirouette, oh 
you think so much and wander so little 


my fighter now punch your way towards 
train station, Adlestrop, no I mean the 
paddle pop at the mass rapid transit stand, 
we should blockchain to Shenzhen for 
biohack components, I foresee a subskin 
flat breadboard to prototype a filter that 
pollutes all incoming news of the world, 
yes lad, views o' the pearled nihilistening. 


240 


Part 2 


In which recent months in the life of The Fighter are 
recounted, with regards to his loss in a boxing match on 
the beach, how he has become a target for youths 
wanting to make a name for themselves, and how he has 
turned to space tourism and living with a Spanish dub 
music collective in the shadow of his loss, avoiding the 


life he once lived. 


It is possible he should have allowed 
the blood poisoning from his tooth 

to swallow him after the knock taken 
in the beachside ring back six months 
that afternoon when the sandscape 
melted in waves of grainy lava phasing 
see Les Darcy at Balmoral, see how 
Red and Gold Sunset by Whistler was 


a mirror unto the slides of diagnostic 
hemoglobin observed in the seaside 
maternity hospital, see the young cad 
in Woolworths sizing up The Fighter 
and being egged on by mates and and 
wham he receives The Fighter in his 
toffee toned raincoat with enough full 
physical force to turn the contenders 


241 


muscle tendons into yeast, crushed ye 
entropically into the bakery shelves, 

thy mass now the bread of the universe 
that The Failure would later say must 
be broken off and shared unto itself like 
trees too far gone with sending signals 
of biological risk to one another so now 
all dialogue is via transplanted limbs. 


Beyond the sealed lid of the world The 
Fighter took his fourth space tourist jaunt 
last week so the next trip is half price. As 
Presley sang in Clambake, look for the 
brightest lights in town to see the abyss 
embrace its gown, as Bernard sang on 
occasion of the first heart transplant, the 
original has gone missing but I've a spare. 


When The Fighter was oh at age young 
people are when they start manipulating 
subterranean engines jaunt aire in shafts 
of choral resonance, was acutely aware 
whilst toting a wooden staff that up there 
beyond the mostly sealed lid, in waiting, 
dressed in magnesium white, a weapon 
with his name on it, aimed at him, always. 


242 


Call it fate call it Word he knows they get 
one shot at him and he one back at them, 
from A to B parabola to C, shoot and see, 
fill your gold shoes with funerals and let 

it be, remind me whom history will erase 


time after time with multi pass overwrites. 


According to The Failure, The Fighter is 
quote all that, he is unbloodytouchable. 


But if this is the case then why the loss 
in the ring on the beach the other arvo, 
not within mirror view for him this year 
living on earth seaside with Agua Viva, 
in their recording studio van producing 
dub dancehall variations with casiotone 
and echo stompbox, transmitted arterial 
through city veins by a dish on the roof. 


He stumbled up to them one heatstroke 
afternoon beachscape dripping against 
pedestrian skyline, The Fighter singing 
in this lowing guttural mumble vibe that 
just seemed to work, we found the bass 
thus spake the orphan bandmates, but 
why you here, go home be a family man, 
The Fighter more like The Volaverunt eh, 


243 


we hear your wife is calientes, we saw a 
print that Baudelaire implored his friend 
to buy from Goya’s son, Duchess of Alba, 
supersize purple bow on waist, necklace, 
big copper bell seated immensely in her 
ketchup hair, star salted peregrine eyes, 
and you were there too, shaggy whiskers, 
damaged teeth sunk in parish beachballs. 


244 


Part 3 


In which The Fighter and The Failure catch the bullet 
train from Singapore to Shenzhen in order to meet Cy, a 
biohacker with a penchant for pretty and eccentric 
gadgets. They discuss their intention to create an 
obfuscation device that would overclock the amount of 


incoming news to the brain in order to scramble any 
attempt to give order to it, but Cy wonders if they might 
not be better considering the notion of Sideways Music 
(Markosian, N. (2020). Sideways music. Analysis, 


80(1), 51-59. ). 


Sleeping on the Kunming rail, 
passing unseen the litchi and 
mangrove plantations beneath 
iron pillars the size of inverted 
super deep boreholes, white 
coats smooth and super clean 
holding up magnetic lines we 
dream along in fair sequence. 


They wake on platform four as 
their bullet snake feigns death 
and stretches beside the others. 


From station it is a short wander 
adjoining a light matrix of young 


starfield commons up alleyways 


full of jumble markets with boxes 
full of assorted future warez.com 


245 


The Failure says, my lad, place 
your nose to thine florets, we’st 
seek Cy’s workshoponderlando. 

I wish to get data drunk on junk 
spam revelations incoming from 
a world that cannot stop talking. 
Plz decimate our pattern hungry 
senses and splinter all the things. 


We find her outside a bar, Thee 
Melted Crayon, slurping a neon 
cocktail that shee deposits behind 
a hologram of an oak tree, fixing 
her grip on a transparent umbrella 
with a projector built in so when 
you long gaze up ‘neath the brolly 
you see a sky full of HD digital rain 


falling from where, def not this sky 
as it is a sunny afternoon, sure no 
Son, but so too no sky. Upworld is 

a labyrinth ceiling of sly balconies 
investing gravity withdrawals Cyoh 
knows all too well, plastic pastelish 
raincoat ready to deflect falling fish, 
gamma yays, emotions, palimpsests 


246 


backing up to heaven where she'll 
audit their algorithms in good time 
through this demo cyan augmented 
reality sun visor Cy wears daily that 
produces a wireframe slow motion 
delay video replay seen aka events 

in her vicinity, tiny cameras mounted 
within strands of hello chestnut hair. 


You thinking of sewing a chip ‘tween 
ears and eyes scatter sensory input, 

Cy tips up box of PCBs and solder ah 
but I think it will just benchmark some 
state of rave confusion and recursive 
semiotic fission. You want not junk - 
you want a hyper ethical experience 
(remember, complexity isn't a vice). 


She stretches northward, dude ru 
savvy to the notion of what major 
philosophy kids, she glances left + 
right, call, whisper, Sideways Music. 
The Fighter and The Failure = no. 
Cy touches her heart and JS Bach 
starts playing, BWV 847 via MIDI 
clavier, blood pulsing metronome 


247 


guiding horizontal passage so each 
note can resound in turn. Consider 
with me, she tilts her smile ninety °, 

if each note did not follow the other in 
sequence, across time, but this order 
was turned sideways, so every note 

in the song played at the same time. 
What a mess, right. Well how about... 


248 


Part 4 


In which Cy takes The Fighter and The Failure to see 
four children who hack nature beside the Port of 
Shenzhen. The children implant a printed circuit board 
beneath the skin of The Failure. The board contains a 
dial that, when The Failure extends his thumb ninety 
degrees, causes him to experience a sensation whereby all 
time is compressed into a single moment. For The 
Failure, this means recognising again that he is alone. 


Asunrise quartet of children flicker 
wet pliers and sandpaper across 
atin bench covered in fish scales 
down by eastward harbour, a four 
hundred km run between cargo 
ships, ghosts, bits of circuitry and 
surgical gauze betwixt their poly 
dancing fingers, it is right here that 


Cy wants to demonstrate empirical 
proof of concept already in and of the 
noumenal world, these kids hacking 
nature, not distorting they sez, these 
young ones without even looking at 
The F and The F, it is peeling back 
skin of the blonde songbird to reveal 
what is covered up by so much dust 


249 


and lace, as cloud strata, architecture 
of hope gas that renders dirt and bone 
invisible from space, fog of war, know 
The Fighter walks in low orbit for this 
reason, pure critique of, well so now 
The Failure puts his hand onth bench 
of fish scales and jump wire, coughs 
backwards and says, Bleed Here Now. 


The children sew a wafer thin board 
‘neath the anatomical snuff box of the 
right hand of T. Failure containing what, 
get this, they call four dimensional print 
lacing with a four - yes, | | | | - terminal 
potentiometer that can rotate ninety ° 
by extending a loom of thumb cartilage 
document.body.appendChild(hope). 


Spake Cy, the reason this is the word 

is not because it will deliver the world 
unto a box of broken biscuits. As Olivia 
Newton-John stated, let us get ethical. 
Say you twist temporal information at 
quarter angle, sideways, it means, like 
our pile of Bach notes, rather than one 
thing happening after another, consider 


250 


asin committed that you seek to later 
absolve but there is no later, or before, 
what then of morality if no timeline, no 
woe to go because consequences and 
antecedents are one and the same, if 

it all happens at once it means nothing, 
stone bronze tin holocene cyberpastoral 
ergo a sideways morality, Be Here Now. 


The punchline, Cy says, is that if space 
time is vertical then ethics aint tall ‘nough 
to take the ride, hellooo, she places pink 
fingernailed tips on Ekta, hey, into his 0’ 
cheeks, his nasojugal crease, says 000’ 
earth to Majorali Ekta, hello in thereeee, 
then grabs his right hand and pushes his 
his thumb all the way to its pole position. 


The Fighter and The Failure look at each 


other like the thin line of midday (morning 


and afternoon rendered now as one) so 4 
D becomes two becomes as one, and as 

he moves his thumb side on Ekta sighs, so 
The Fighter was the story of my youth twas 
telling to The Failure that ever have I been. 
Of course, I knew all this seven stanzas in. 


251 


Now worry not, Ekta quote unquote laughs, 
robots have not taken over yet. This old man, 
he loves failure, he has skin that feels scalier. 
Sure, I loved the apoplectic fights of younger 
days when my skin smooth as rocket behind - 
But neither children nor Cy could decode this 
solo vox out of the collapsed jumble of audio 
Ekta bloomed all at once in static sonic tutti: 


Ohm 


252 


253 


254 


Pugil 


Predawn streets cup pilot light shopfronts - 
newsagents, bakeries - 
embers that ignite a city's slow awakening. 


Katita hasn’t yet served the previous day its 
unconscious dues, circling back to the shared 
rooftop garden (after takeaway Thai) as the moon 
rose, staring into the void (a preferred leisure) still 
there at sunrise, work unfinished, body yearning 
for close, she takes the elevator to the bakery now 
for metabolic reparations, fuel for undisturbed 
repose. 


Morning. 
Against all better judgement, yes it is. 
What can I get you. 


Cherry-blonde tumble, tousle, librarian glasses, 
light cheek freckles, white polo shirt up to new 
year sapling collarbone. 


What do you recommend. 

Don't answer that, 

how about a cheese and bacon roll, 
hold the roll. I'm delirious, I'm ok. 
And where do you get arms like that 


255 


anyway, gyms should replace 
dumbbells with rolling pins 
and whisks. 


Auburn mess, scrappy beard, 


flour hands like cloud gloves. 


256 


Did you see the moon earlier. 
That's kind of personal, isn't it. 
We've only just met. 
I knew a woman once - 
Here we go. 
- who was congenitally blind. 
Continue. 
One night when she was young her mother 
commented how big the moon was. She 
replied, what do you mean, is it not always 
the same size. Her mum said no, the moon 
appears bigger or smaller depending on 
where it is observed in relation to its 
distance from the earth. 
The moon changes size. 
Yes. That was something her braille 
textbooks had ignored. 
I have a nephew who calls a full moon 
an apple moon and a waxing or 
waning moon a banana moon. 
Two moons. So why are you delirious. 
Can't sleep, can't work. 
What do you do. 


Oh you know, this and that. At the 
moment I'm working part-time as a 
travel agent for space tourism. 

Which moon do you recommend. 
Moons are out this season, they're 
going through a phase. 

So what do tourists do up there. 
They float around for thirty minutes 
and look down at the blue marble we're 
on and question the finite period we're 
given to conjure infinite variations of 
sweet nothing. At the end you get a t- 
shirt with the milky way on it, or it 
could be lint, depending on the box it 
comes out of. 

How much. 
Ten thousand dollars, but remember 
that includes the shirt. 


Leif looks at Katita mathematically. 


Ten thousand dollars for thirty minutes. 
Give or take. 

I can get that by the end of the day. How 

often do flights take off, how long is the 

waitlist. 


Katita crinkles her nose and takes a bite of her 
cheese and bacon roll. She chews and watches Leif 
as he walks from behind the bread cuapboard to 


257 


step onto the street, looking up into the sky at the 
mulberry backlit stratus. 
He walks back into the shop. 


258 


Who do I give the money to. 


Do you really have a spare 
ten thousand dollars. 


Ican get it by the end of the day, I - 


Yes. 

- can organise something. 

Okay. Well, listen it's been a gas. 
Tonight I'm scheduled to fight a local guy, 
a cop - 

Excuse me. 

- for five grand, but I reckon the guy 
organising it would double the winnings if 
I agreed to fight two guys at once, and 
won, which I would. 

What am I listening to, what is this 

crazy talk. Are we just being absurd 

right now, you know I'm fine if that's 
the case. What are you, a prize fighter. 

What is this, your dough-jo. 

Yes exactly, in a - 

I was kidding. 

- local tournament run by some guys from 
the port ranks. I'm going to make a couple 
calls and get it set up. Ten gees. You should 
come along and watch. 


Wow. As fun as that sounds, to see the 
baker who gave me a cheese and bacon 
roll and yarned about the moon as 
misperceived by a blind acquaintance 
step into a, what is it, a ring, I'm - 
Not really a ring, just different apartments 
around town, King Street, Hunter Street, 
on a rotational basis. They clear floor space 
and stand well back. 
- going to bid you good luck and 
reconsider my morning food options 
going forward. God speed. 


Katita winks and saunters out of the bakery in a 
slow-motion fall that maintains its gravity all the 
way into the elevator and her apartment where she 
spills onto an op shop chaise lounge. An unnamed 
roommate is pouring juice and toasting a bagel in 
the kitchen and she says to Katita see you later on 
and Katita mumbles mfmahuanowha and rolls off 
the lounge and the roommate shuts the door on 
exit. 


She exhales her body off the floor and lingers 
airborn like dustlight before smooshing 

her face against a harbour-facing window to 
follow the swan dive wisp of a seaplane 

dip its pontoons into the coal terminal basin. 


259 


Awarm shower, that's the next step towards sleep. 
She's followed all the recommended procedures so 
far: 

- don't sleep 

- elevate to the rooftop after 

a serving of warm Pad Thai 

- stare vacantly into the void 

- feel hungry 

- talk to a strange baker about 

moons and prize fighting 

- spill onto a lounge, mumble 

- view seaplane 


Now structured raindrops 

descend a matrix of grout 

across her trajectories (Katita's phrasing) 
stirring foam with sulfates, 

memories want conspire 

therefore towel, so cotton, moreover 222. 


Leif has passed serving responsibilities over to his 
younger brother so he can step out the back and 
get on the blower to set up a two on one fight. 
Everyone from the organisers to the guy he was 
scheduled to take on are sceptical - might not this 
give Leif an unforeseen advantage, perhaps it's not 
that easy to be part of a duo fighting someone, 
especially a slugger of Leif's reputation on the 
circuit. But when Leif offers to put some money 
forward to add to the kitty for his two opponents if 


260 


they win it pretty much settles things, that and 
when the organiser gets a call back from one of the 
toughest opponents Leif has fought who is keen 
for a shot at revenge, the event is locked in, seven 
o'clock tonight. 


His shift finished, Leif changes in the bathroom 
and begins a steady jog westward, 

sidestepping craters in the alley, faking through 

a chainlink fence, damask horizon 

powdering brick spires, gasworks and fish co-ops 
in disintegrating shadows between 

him and his destination, a field out the back of an 
import export customs processing 

yard, between there and a rail line, empty sheds 
of corrugated iron overflowing with 

jilted lines of elephant legs and cardiac swoon, no 
painted linguistic splash, post game 

verb drippings, only images that remind him how 
he threw his body down speedways, 

crunched through neon petal gambits by way of 
empty bus stabilities and made light 

stream in an unmitigated data flow like dynamite, 
with eyes like sliced lemons, sweating 

dusted sugar entropy - 

he'd made it as a contender. 


Better living through geometry, that's a classic Leif 
motto, watching the weather, sensing pressure 
drops, repeating iconographies, the body language 


of insects, city ostinatos that reveal behavioural 
loops, how the key to winning a fist fight is less 
about watching your opponent dance and more 
about listening out for fluctuations in audience 
jeers, how collectives anticipate more than they 
know, the data contained in the particles of their 
breath spittle, it tells you to step north-east and 
throw a haymaker at a dimple. 


Jogging down King Street he detects a potential 
symmetry and shifts his weight for a left turn onto 
Perkins to land outside the old Victoria Theatre 
and in the face of guess who - Katita, tartan head 
scarf, navy blouse, double take. 


Hello stranger. 
You're stalking me, this is an 
unexpected turn in events. Did I not 
pay for the breadroll, did I not fulfill 
my end of the bargain. 

Do you work here. 
I mean, that's a bit of a leap. 

You spend time here 

and they give you money. 
Well when you put it that way. 


She shows him around the cavernous gloom of the 
converted theatre, blue folds of high luminescence 
peeling through divisions where pigeons still nest, 
necklacing a burgundy carpet draped across stage 


boards. Here a television talk show format has 
been established with the standard guest couch, 
chair and desk alignment. Katita explains that she 
is a writer for the show, a new production. They 
are preparing to film the pilot episode next week. 


Who is the host. 


A bit of an unknown, he's done some 
community radio, he'll do. 


How's the material. 


Shoot. 


It's a difficult birth. Shall I tell you 
what I've got so far. 


I'm working on a game. Local 
celebrities, guests and audience 
members will be invited to participate 
each week. The premise is this: the host 
pretends to be a real estate agent 
selling a very expensive luxury home. 
A participant is invited to a viewing of 
the house, but what they want - the 
point of the game - is to find ways to 
stay in the house forever without 
buying it. For example, someone 
might say to the real estate agent: can 
we just stay another fifteen minutes so 
I can see how the sun looks at this 
angle through the kitchen window. 
Fine, fifteen minutes, that's no trouble. 
But then they say they would love to 


2.63 


smell how home made bread wafts in 
the kitchen, they are close to calling the 
bank to make an offer on the house, 
can they just make a bit of food in the 
kitchen to see if it feels right. And then 
the excuses keep on. Can I invite my 
dog over, can I ask my parents to 
knock at the door so I can feel what it 
would be like to have them come over, 
can I just see what the sound of traffic 
is like of an evening from the bedroom, 
can I stay for the public holiday over 
the long weekend to see how 
rambunctious the locals get, can I 
plant an apple tree in the front yard 
and see how long until roots start to 
take hold, quality soil is very 
important when buying a house, and 
so on. The player wins a prize if they 
can keep the host - the real estate 
agent - agreeing to their ridiculous 
demands for two minutes. A big digital 
clock starts counting down from the 
moment the host says, Time to close 
up. So, what do you think. 
I think I would ask if I could raise children 
there, to rule lines above their heads as 
they grow, to see how our collected 
memories feel as they fill up the rooms. 
That would definitely give you a couple 


more years, a decade maybe, to try the 
house out to see if it fits. You'd 
probably even win a prize. You're 
oddly sweet, in a punchy sort of way. 
Speaking of which, I need to go train. 
You're still coming, aren't you. Seven 
o'clock tonight, just down from here 
actually, King Street, out the back of the 
Lucky Country, third terrace along. Come 
upstairs, the door will be open. You'll know 
it's the right place when you step inside. 
Listen mister, I'm just a simple girl 
trying to write interactive talk show 
folly 
You'll dig it. Three working class men 
beating into each other for money. Now 
that's comedy. 
I'm scared and confused just enough to 
know I can't miss out on whatever 
you're involved in. Seven o'clock, I'll be 
the one hiding behind my hands, 
trying not to get blood on my shoes. 
Amazing, I'll take you out for curly fries 
afterwards. 
It just keeps getting better. I'd better 
get back to work, I have a skit about 
awkward bakery encounters that I'm 
putting together. You'll never believe it, 
the inspiration is straight out of real 


life. 


265 


Afternoon in the city treads duskward. Myna birds 
tweak, parking meters capitulate, bank loans are 
stamped, trams become toylike, lanterns unfold 
from the centre of the page creasing up into 
cathedral peaks, treefinger latitudes, ramen 
petting, stir ember fade fiasco, settle smudge. 


Through these diminishing colours Katita footfalls 
Perkins onto King and Crown through a narrow 
brick corridor, pressed on one side by the band 
room of the Lucky Country, warm up bass 
arpeggios phasing through the mortar, with dim 
lanterns hung against the opposite wall where 
second storey apartments congregate above street 
traffic. Out front of the landing of the third 
apartment along is a bird cage with a cowbell 
hanging inside. This is the place, but is Katita 
really going to go up there, into whatever is 
happening up there - this is what she says to 
herself, Katita, are you really going to etc, and then 
she thinks, well etc, and she does. 


The first thing Katita sees at the end of the hallway 
is an open plan living room with traffic cones set 
up at six positions around the middle, not 
dissimilar to the clay and rice straw bales that 
designate the dohyo arena for a bout of sumo 
wrestling. At the boundary of these cones two 
dozen plastic lawn chairs were set up, more then 
half of them already occupied by mostly 


2.66 


professionally attired men in their forties and 
fifties. 


Katita elects to sit by herself and readies a few 
disarming comments to anybody who should 
choose to sit next to her and offer small talk, but 
fortunately this isn't necessary as Leif pretty much 
immediately walks out and takes up his position 
opposite her as two other men, similar build to 
Leif but a little older, one dressed in gym clothes 
and the other in board shorts and a singlet, stand 
in front of him at ten and two. The lights dim, a 
cowbell is struck and three men become one stack 
of muscle and flesh, like a Lucien Freud oil 
painting of Leigh Bowery compressed into Francis 
Bacon's ‘Triptych’ (when I say ‘like’, I mean 
precisely). 


Blinking fists mod a 
quick response space 
invader uppercut to 
the opposite of care 
(polly want a wacker). 


His footwork is undeniable, his haymaker a 
blessing. Leif throws the bodies of both his 
opponents out of the ring, into the kitchen, where 
they dampen against the tiles. He isn't even out of 
breath. Leif exits the room. 


267 


During the fight he made eye contact with Katita 
for only a single frame of the twenty four per 
second that comprised her cinematic attention, 
and for all the world he looked not like a baker, nor 
a prizefighter, nor even, as cliché might imbue, a 
wild animal, which he was far beyond during this 
fragment of gaze. His eyes, it would occur to Katita 
only later as the room was emptying of spectators, 
were that of unbridled fiction, a generative 
voidbeast, event horizons gesturing towards some 
collapse of the real, the world as thrill and 
aberration, a static horror residing within the gap 
between a pinwheel rolodex of academic 
intelligibility and cataclysmic bliss. 


He scared her antiquely, 
yesterday's baseline fears, 
like the sun going down 
on the last prime number. 


They walk out together without saying a word. He 
presses a thick envelope into his backpack and she 
presses her eyes to the ground. He opens the door 
to Big Als where they take a booth of burger 
tomato red vinyl and order fries. The jukebox is 
playing an electro vocoder cover of The Smiths' 
‘There is a light that never goes out' by a Berlin 
based duo. 


268 


Masticating in relative silence for, say, ten 
minutes, Katita swallows a chip and chimes - 


I have a recurring fantasy that I have 
been called in to a meeting at some 
high profile marketing company. They 
have been tasked with creating a 
campaign to put up a billboard 
announcing a new stage production of 
Lord of the Rings starring Christopher 
Walken as Gandalf. They have been 
scratching their heads for weeks trying 
to conjure the perfect tag line for the 
poster, when I walk in and say, 
"Everybody's Tolkien ‘bout a new way 
of Walken", and then turn on my heel 
and leave the room, knowing that I 
have just presented them with 
marketing perfection. You know the 
song ‘Walk Right In' by The Rooftop 
Singers, from the Forrest Gump 
soundtrack. Anyway, what I'm trying 
to say is, as impressive as this fantasy 
would be if it were ever enacted, it 
would still be less meaningful than 
what you did in that apartment 
tonight. 


Leif wipes his lips and says, that's very kind of you 
to say, and the best part is, now I have enough 


269 


money for the space tourist jaunt. So, how do I set 
it up, should I call you in the morning and make a 
payment, set a date. How's it work. 


The look on Katita's face is the antinomy of Leif's 
eye contact during the fight. He wipes his hands 
on his pants and says, let's head down to the beach. 


They cross an empty road and ease down a sloped 
path that salts alongside the beach and onto the 
cities public baths. A single pear shaped globe 
hangs from a wire above the pool. Long spectator 
steps curve around the corner of the water, with 
coal ships, like watch batteries on a clothes line, 
just visible on the horizon. 


Sitting on a bench is an astronaut. 
From the change rooms a tall figure 
in tan robes steps out, 

dragging the sonic equivalent of 
loose change 

along the concrete perimeter. It is 
a rope with alarm clocks 


tied at intervals, clanging, ticking, 


and Leif stares. 


270 


The robed figure leaves the clocks 
poolside as they wade 
to the pool's centre, beckoning 


the spaceman. 

Gliding into moonlit ripples our 
astronaut glides across 

to the billowing robes and waits 
for immersion. 

They are submerged with a hand 
to the helmet, the robed 

figure pushing them backwards 
with one hand 

while pulling the alarm clocks 
in with the other, 

dragged to the pool's floor 

to cry out, 

they ring now like whale words, 
ambient pulsations, 


horologe resonance chimes, 


water music, 


271 


and the astronaut stays down 
amidst the chorale 
while Katita looks at Leif 


for meaning, 


so, transfixed, Leif says that 
the baptism is now 
complete, the astronaut can 


go into space. 


Let's say that Leif and Katita walk back into the city 
after this spectacle and as they come to a busy 
crossroad, a steep gutter, one puts their hand into 
the warm crescent of the other, palms and fingers 
latticed, gravitating like the spontaneous 
contraction of muscles around the heart, while 
star systems above them fight for obscurity. 


272 


273 


274 


Nature as Landscape 
(from 'Antinimocity’) 


The point at which the riverrun creek 
transitions into a dry, walkable storm-water drain 
is located beneath a rail bridge that carries both 
freight and passenger trains (but not coal, which 
travels on the other side of the TAFE for a brief 
moment before diverting to the highfields). My 
dog is comfortable with the rumble now as the 
trains pass overhead as we trespass the drain’s 
broad, curved trajectories from one side of the city 
to the other. 

We don’t start here, though. Our walk 
commences two kilometres back, two of the over 
five hundred kilometres of drain network across 
the city, expanding and contracting to varying 
degrees of width. The stretch we walk spans 
twenty metres across, but it narrows to only three 
or four metres as it slinks into the heights of the 
suburbs. Aside from a couple of bridges the drain 
is completely open air, seated some three metres 
below ground level with steep concrete walls, 
appearing somewhat like a baking tray or a marble 
run. 

I first guided my dog down here after 
reading a book by a local author about his own 
walks through the drain with his dog. The book 


275 


was written in the style of the English naturalists, 
the walking phenomenologists who made it their 
mission and their pleasure to observe the area in 
which they lived in service of folk scientific 
inquiry, learning the names of the plants, the 
variety of birds flitting about, recognising seasonal 
patterns. 

There is a section in the book where the 
author wanders beneath a fold of torn metal 
fencing into the disused gasworks that runs 
alongside the storm-water drain, and he says that 
if asked by any remnant security or council 
workers why he was trespassing, he would simply 
say that his dog ran through the fence and that he 
was just going in to retrieve him. That was enough 
of a license for me to do the same. 

Putting aside the joy of watching my dog 
run free through the length of drain as far as my 
vision carries, in which we have never in my years 
of doing this come across another dog down here, 
and only very occasionally another human 
traveller, my favourite part of the trek is a length 
of some five hundred metres that curves out of 
view from the nearest bridge or roadway, not 
visible from the rail line either, so that for some 
ten minutes of walking it is as if I am the only 
human on the planet. It is a solipsist’s dream - on 
one side is the abandoned gasworks, on the other 
an abandoned fuel depot, both vacant of any 
activity, and growing along the ridge of the walls 


276 


of the drain are these immense golden willows 
that hang low their branches and rustle like a 
nineteen-fifties mesh coin purse that softly pleat 
coins of jangled sunlight. Sometimes I lean back 
and watch the trees repeat their breeze-jostled 
sequence for twenty minutes while my dog finds a 
warm patch of ground to embrace. 

One early morning some weeks back, 
beneath just this sort of gentle acceleration of 
sunlight, my dog and I clambered up the concrete 
walls of the drain at a point where a minor 
stormwater course joins up with the central 
passage and found ourselves on a raised spit of 
field that backs onto the old gasworks. Not only 
backs onto but leads into, as a nearby security gate 
is wide open within the surrounding mesh fence 
line. Until the nineteen-eighties, the gasworks 
turned coal, through an oxidation process, into gas 
for the city. Now it sits vacant, a half dozen silos 
casting shadows over bullgrass and dust like a 
batch of giant, discarded sundials. Most of the 
stairwells attached to the side of the silos are 
wholly rusted away, but one remains intact, 
enough so that my dog and I can ascend to the top 
without any hassle. 

On top of the silo I feel a sudden sensation 
to recline on its flat concrete lid and close my eyes, 
my dog already doing the same beside me, in a 
gesture that I can only describe as_ being 
analogously triggered by another mirrored 


277 


278 


circumstance some months prior. At that time I was, 
again, walking with my dog down the drain but in the 
opposite direction, towards an area surrounded by 
sporting facilities. 

It was coming into twilight, but the sun was in a 
similar position to now, just on the opposite side of the 
sky, falling instead of rising. My dog leapt up the sides of 
the drain to get to the grass up there, preferring its soft 
texture beneath his paws after all that concrete, and 
when I followed him up I saw we were on a bank of turf 
behind a fence at the back of a soccer field. Soccer season 
was over for the year and the grounds were empty and 
inactive, but just like the gasworks, a security gate within 
the mesh fence had been left open. So, we walked in. 

The grass was dry and wispy. It looked like it had 
been some weeks since it was last mown, and perhaps 
this unkempt appraisal beckoned my dog to freely bound 
around its quadrant. The soccer field is at the back of 
another sporting field, which is at the back of a tennis 
facility, so it is out of view of public thoroughfare when 
not in use. This is not an excuse to just let a dog run 
around a private sporting facility, nor an excuse to 
wander into an abandoned gasworks, but sometimes 
moral problems give way to aesthetic solutions, 
especially when ambient evening light presses its weight 
over an expanse such as this. 

It had been a long day and a long month, and as I 
wandered onto the middle of the pitch, I sat down, 
looked up at the extinguished stadium lights, and 
thought about how peaceful it would be to fall back into 


the grass and go to sleep there. I woke up some two 
hours later in the dark, with a back pocket full of missed 
calls from my wife. 

Forty or so minutes (who is counting) after 
deciding to recline on the top of the old silo, I opened my 
eyes and realised that the same thing had happened 
again, just as on the soccer field - I thought it would be 
nice to have a rest in an empty public space and 
unknowingly, without anticipation, fall asleep, but who 
would have thought I would see it through. I woke up 
facing the sky with a start and gripped the roof of the silo 
with clamped fingers, worried I was nearer the edge than 
I actually was. 

Slowly turning my head to the side, I locked eyes 
with my dog as he began reading my expression, which I 
immediately softened so as to not cause him any undue 
distress. Beyond his curled form, big brown bucket of 
fluff that he is, I looked across the pitched rooftops of 
nearby factories and warehouses, across the rail line, to 
the TAFE where I could see the quarters my son and I 
covered there, from the creek to the car park, from one 
magnitude of bricks to another to the courtyards in their 
wake. 

Gazing across a broad expanse of geography fills 
me with a sense of pending internal completeness. When 
you sit on the beach and look out to the ocean or sit on a 
porch and look across a field towards a distant mountain 
range - is the attraction a physical one, a resonance with 
symmetry, scale and colour, the lines of the environment, 
an impetus to action. Or rather, is it a metaphysical 


279 


attraction, rendering the ocean and the field as 
metaphors, as an architecture of poetics that conjure 
feelings of freedom, infinity, the purity of faultless nature, 
and our kinship by association. 

I have come to think of my relationship with 
landscape as one of subphysicality, beneath conscious 
association and physical connection, within enclaves of 
unintelligibility in a manner that positions these 
landscapes as analogous to the shape of the inland empire 
that is my subjectivity. These landscapes are not 
analogous in an abstract form within my mind; instead, 
they exist as my mind - subject as object. 

To look from the ceiling of the gas silo across an 
expanse of grassland and industry is to recognise the 
literal chemical, electrical silhouette of my own awareness. 
Environmental declivities and ascensions are carved into 
the fabric of my consciousness as into an inverted mirror, 
allowing landscape to pour into the negative space at the 
foothold of my thoughts, providing to the body a 
simulation of what division without remainder might feel 
like. 

During a recent afternoon at the TAFE, while my 
son and I were going up and down a stairwell that leads to 
a storage corridor beneath one of the buildings, I spotted a 
lady, in her sixties say, five foot-something, wiry and 
postured forthright, dressed in dark materials with 
patches of purple and green that I associate with tapestry, 
and what I saw her do was circle one of the gum trees 
standing fifty metres from where my son and I were on 
the stairwell, and she took a long eye-level gaze at the 


280 


trunk of the tree before walking over to it, turn to face 
the other way, and let her body fall back into the tree 
where, somehow, her body perfectly fit. 

I had not looked at the tree previously, but based 
on what I was seeing, it appears that in one side of the 
tree there was a gap, perhaps where the tree had rotted 
away and left an inclination, that cupped her body as if 
she was born out of that very tree. When I saw her enact 
this scene, I thought, that’s right, landscape as analogy, 
subject as object, she and the tree are two connected 
parts of a whole. She is the framework of subjectivity and 
the tree is the external world forged from its cast. 

To talk about landscape and nature is to talk 
about oneself indirectly. Possibly it is the only manner in 
which to talk about oneself that is not socially repulsive. 
What I’m doing here, with this sort of writing and 
thinking about walking, is initiating the technology 
through which I escape from populated society. I enjoy 
living in the city, but I tend to believe that a city reaches 
its functional peak once it becomes empty of people. 

Well, so long as it leaves for my son and me to 
talk its silent quarters, where the city becomes an 
instrument, and the sunlight that forms triangles 
beneath our footfalls the bow with which it is played, 
resonating ghost songs that are, of course, love songs in 
their most pure form. 


282 


Based On Your 
Viewing History 


The last two videos he watched 
(finished with replay simulacra) 
were enough for him. 


The first was of a wasp trying 
(desperately, without success) 
to reattach its own 


decapitated head, turning it 
(frantically, every which way) 
like a rubix cube 


in order to find the position 
(impossible, we know this) 
that reconnects 


the nervous system and 
(with a jolt, with relief) 
allows life to continue. 


The second was of a recording 


(transferred via deep space) 
from the surface ofa 


283 


284 


comet, never before captured, 
(reflect on the engineering) 
wherein we observe 


grainy ice storm parallax frames 
(like a grey and white flipbook) 
sequenced together 


from a burst of small photographs 
(onboard the Rosetta probe) 
to generate motion. 


The wasp video has a duration 
(too long for his capacity) 
of one minute, while 


the comet video only lasts for 
(always shown as a loop) 
one second, and the 


question that he has right now 
(that he is done with film) 
is what poets would do 


with these visuals compared 
(think pre-information age) 
with the universal 


nature of images that readers 
(contained within analogies) 
previously related to 


because they knew what they saw 
(and so saw what they knew) 
in regular daily life. 


285 


286 


His Is A Quiet Carriage 


Young people of a number who find 
producing words from their mouths a difficult task 
will tend to wear their consciousness lightly. They 
must on a coin shift weight and pivot quickly in 
order to pronounce alternative turns of phrase to 
say what they mean to say but in a new way. It 
causes one to acknowledge yet formally reject 
gravity in favour of a mode of buoyancy that relies 
on a method of falling upwards away from the 
ribbons of tongue that feel for all the world like 
they are woven around tank trap tetrahedra. 

Twenty years ago in the nineties I had a 
job working for a soccer club. The punchline to this 
story is that the club between nineteen ninety five 
and nineteen ninety seven had no players due to 
financial declivity yet for contractual reasons the 
club had to continue as if they did. What I am 
saying is that it was my job to simulate soccer 
matches for radio and the occasional news video 
highlight reel so as to present the illusion that the 
Broadmeadow Magic were still a fully functioning 
team even though it was just me late nights in a 
little office beside the empty field. 

One early evening near the field there was 
an accident where an old Commodore performed 
an unsuccessful merge. Bits of broken car were 


287 


scattered across three lanes and in this old mother 
hubbard dress the driver of the Commodore 
kneeled and gathered up what she could including 
shards of reflective plastic that caught the low sun 
like handfuls of wedding confetti rendered some 
long years later as glitter misremembered in a day 
drunk pollyanna dream. She looked so tired and all 
I could think was how much I wanted to help her 
go to sleep. 

At times an opposing team of real 
footballers would visit my office to record their 
voice trails and ambient grunts for a radio 
broadcast. A couple of them would vocalise into a 
paper cup to add distance and space to the 
recording while the rest would watch The Late 
Show with David Letterman in the adjoining 
kitchenette. Our favourite episodes were the ones 
where Dave would ring random numbers to ask 
about the weather and more often than not 
nobody would answer and I would close my eyes 
and see myself in those otherwise empty homes 
observing the phone ring out amid pleats of dust 
and light. 

One of the ways I would confront my 
stuttering was to pretend I was sleep walking 
through a conversation. Through this gauze of 
reduced consequence I would record audio 
broadcast summary snippets of games to be sent 
on to 1233 Newcastle ABC. Spaced out my mouth 
would lazily drawl a run of familiar names Cleary 


288 


passes to Horadam and onto Selwood and mostly I 
would let the other team win but on the occasions 
we were the victors the station would light up with 
calls from elated fans barely able to put into words 
finally we had it you know as they say in us all 
along. 

A handful of times during this period I was 
asked by NBN Television to provide five second 
video match highlight reels for the evening news. 
It was one of those situations where I could have 
asked players from other teams to shadow play on 
the field but I understood due to mid nineties 
enamorment with arcade video game racers that 
less real representations of objects in the world 
were often more visibly believable than the so 
called real thing. Sega Japan had recently 
developed an AM2 chip for virtual reality that 
showed how a field mown into high contrast 
quadrants could beneath moon glow produce 
undulating motion. 

And so on balmy nights with a low 
resolution camera in hand I would choose vantage 
points for the lens to rest on one or another life 
giving polygon shadow while through mounted 
speakers the then new Oasis record would play. 
This past week I have been time traveling through 
clips of Liam Gallagher one moment able to hit all 
the high notes he wants and then a decade later 
Noel talking about how Liam used to be able to hit 
all the high notes in Live Forever for example. 


289 


Although when I watch an old acoustic set 
promoting their first LP it is Noel who hits the 
high notes in Live Forever and not Liam. 

Out on the field I would as I gazed from 
the field into the mountain range behind the 
storm drain valley and horse stables where the 
stadium lights cast silhouettes against the hillside 
see illuminated teeming millions as is the way with 
god to whom I was nothing if not similar in how I 
also used light and distance to simulate the 
passage of time. Although of cause we all need to 
admit these days that none of us around here are 
god least of all particularly of course god is not god 
anymore if you follow me. Talk about the 
Australian sublime no not Letterman nor Oasis 
nor the AMz2 chip but that local down under 
suburban feeling of the midnight Summer exotic 
which I would not even say was due to being out 
here on the soccer pitch with its baptismal grass 
but rather I think because of that antique monster 
footfalling down the mountain with what I swore 
could be heard as the soft shoe shuffle of an 
archetype in recline as if the geography was 
producing its own heart murmurs padding the 
underside of muted skin pulled taut over soil like 
the opening bars of a prayer without end. 

The season after this which was the final 
season before the club got its act together and 
found money to find players again I recorded my 
audio match descriptions in an even more 


290 


dreamlike manner that was in the modern 
parlance not unlike an auto sensory meridian 
response video where the intention is to lull the 
listener into a giddy state of deep relaxation. 
When 1233 Newcastle would play my broadcast I 
would watch the city fall asleep like that which 
Wordsworth described but in reverse. The city now 
doth like a garment wear its resignation into 
slumber. 

As I would fall asleep in the kitchenette of 
the office beside the empty field I would from time 
to time see the lady in the old mother hubbard 
dress who crashed her Commodore near the field. 
Through traffic as if across a stilled lake I would 
walk out and embrace her. Without substitution or 
hesitation although she would initially think I was 
saying ambulance ambulance I would actually be 
saying somnambulate somnambulate and the 
traffic signal lights would change and nobody 
would move and with extended release of tongue 
and mouth I would say somnambulate and so on. 


291 


292 


Bundlebloom 


The sky opened up thirty minutes ago and 
too much rain fell out and now the rail north has 
been shut down. A tree fell across the line, or the 
tracks have been washed away, or some other 
ruinous event caused by a storm that is rapidly 
heading down the coast in our direction. No rain 
here yet, wherever here is, some forty minutes out 
from Sydney, although now sandwich boards are 
being blown around the platform by a wind only 
just starting to flex its potential. A woman in her 
fifties, a school teacher, shepherds sixty infant 
school children to a covered area near the toilets 
where she cups her mobile phone in both hands as 
if nursing soup or cradling a stick insect. She 
raises the device into the measured gravity of her 
gaze and does not blink. Over the PA we learn that 
buses and coaches are not able to leave the depot 
due to the conditions, so people had best make 
other arrangements to get away from here. Taxis 
are filing out but none are arriving. 

I start receiving messages from colleagues 
at Sydney airport, all flights cancelled, absolute 
havoc, does anybody have friends in the city that 
can put them up, send an email to let the team 


293 


know you are safe or not. Getting a place for the 
night is the most pressing course of action so I 
ring through to our corporate travel agency for 
accommodation. Nothing local, all booked up 
minutes ago. The city is booking up quickly too 
now that flights are down. There are a couple of 
rooms left in a CBD block of luxury serviced 
apartments, but they fall outside of our booking 
policy because of how expensive they are. I ring my 
boss to get the all clear, either I sleep in a 
stationary train carriage tonight or we foot the bill 
for a waterproof room with a harbour view of the 
pending apocalypse. Minutes later I am on a 
standing room only train back into the city, heavy 
carbon clouds rolling up the rear view skyline and 
removing any previously visible objects in a sweep 
of total erasure. 

Fortunately the hotel is only a two minute 
run from Town Hall station and most of the 
distance is sheltered by the elongated archways of 
St. Andrew’s cathedral that, by way of jigsawed 
shadows, fashion woven brick corridors on past 
the rear entrance by the choir hall, the wedding 
steps, the maintenance garage where a pipe organ 
lays deconstructed, and on past the bus stop where 
the roofing halts and, the storm now here in all its 
immodesty, dumping torrents of heavy black 
raindrops on the streets like a fallen theatre 
curtain of infinitely drenched static, guides slick 
neon bloodlines of bus and taxi headlights from 


294 


the footpath on across the road where I hold my 
bag above my head and fall through the doors of 
the Davier Hotel. As the computers are down all 
rooms and keys are being manually prepared by 
administration on another floor, so the concierge 
directs me to a lounge area to wait with two 
women, one of whom is noticeably pregnant. They 
are watching a classical pianist perform on a 
television mounted beside ten metre high 
windows that, in a state of being thrashed by the 
storm, blockade the lobby from the street. 

The pianist is a young man with his head 
lowered into the keyboard one minute and raised 
to the stage lights the next as the song, French 
sounding, Debussy or Rameau perhaps, flows in 
runs of shifting tempo decisions that bring to 
mind a dancer practicing a move that will lead into 
a jump, starting slow and then taking strides into 
a canter that transitions into a gentle spin and 
then a necessary slowing in order to take stock of 
the move and try again. When the man, who must 
be only in his early twenties, tilts his head back as 
the tempo restrains, the lenses of the teashade 
glasses he is wearing render to a state of opaque 
bright white, like two full moons, twins, hanging 
side by side in black metal frames. His hair could 
have been made from a manicured segment of the 
golden fleece that Jason returned with from 
Colchis, so immaculately it reclines and radiates 
the entire history of grain and sunlight above his 


295 


peace smoothed brow. A crack of thunder roars 
across the city, causing the pregnant woman to 
jump a fair inch above her seat. Once the sound of 
the thunder has dissipated the other woman turns 
to the pregnant woman and I and says, imagine if 
the pianist was not a handsome young man but 
instead a rather unattractive, poorly dressed old 
slob, can you imagine putting him on the front of 
an album cover of Deutsche Grammophon. 

I travel through an interior walkway that 
connects the hotel to a labyrinth food court, an 
architectural mirror to the open air corridors of St. 
Andrew’s cathedral, the choir hall now Uncle 
Tetsu’s Triple-Baked Cheesetarts, the wedding 
steps a Timezone with a new Space Invaders game 
that I put a couple of dollars in before getting a bag 
of fried chicken and heading back to the lobby. The 
women have gone and the television is off. We 
have lost all power down here, the concierge tells 
me, but our generators are operating the elevators 
and the rooms, you will be fine. I travel in a golden 
elevator of tessellating triangles that remind me of 
the pixelated alien craft from Space Invaders, 
frozen geometric segments of the pianist’s hair 
perhaps, his manicured fleece rendered in 
Euclidean ostinato patterns, micro melodic tokens 
pressed between rising floors that draw a line from 
middle C through G flat through B flat and back up 
to C and open onto floor seventeen. 

When I enter the room it is all soft light 


296 


and dark furniture and, while not immediately 
resembling anything like the soft curved 
trajectories of a woman’s body, it is nonetheless 
beautiful. I draw back the curtains and watch as 
the windows bend inward from the pressure of the 
wind. Later beneath the heavy crimson sheets of 
the bed I try to persuade each revolving piece of 
history in my head to fade backwards and to 
instead allow the inside of my mind to act as a 
singular vacuum of warmth and light, to absorb 
the insulating darkness of this room within this 
storm, and to dissolve. 


II 


A couple of days later I am with my infant 
son and our Finnish Lapphund, Jonsi, some ten 
minutes down the street, walking around a 
velodrome that never has its gates locked. The 
apron of the velodrome is a lake of clouds that my 
son plods his red boots in, smudging the sky 
against the céte d'azur, washing up against a 
gallery of spray painted graffiti that will drive me 
away from this place once he learns to read, or at 
least before he starts visually interpreting the 
more menacing designs. It begins with Hello Kitty 
propped up on a green leaf with High Kitty written 
beneath, then a Pac Man ghost holding a balloon, 


297 


looking sad, a thought bubble rising behind it 
containing the words Risk Shit. My dog is sitting 
on the next one, a pink love heart with cursive font 
beside spelling out, in black, Ratchet Bitches and, 
in yellow, Cocaina. The simplest piece of graffiti on 
the whole velodrome is saved for the starting line, 
in all capitals with no accompanying imagery, the 
phrase Eat The Rich. 

This is one of the many isolated, mostly 
abandoned urban areas I bring my son and dog to 
wander around. For them, they get an expansive 
arena to climb and urinate in at their leisure (my 
son the former, my dog the latter, so far), and I get 
the security of knowing the space is mostly fenced, 
providing me some sort of time-stretched 
ambiance, out of view of motorways and the lives 
of others, so I can walk and breathe and think and 
watch my son and Jonsi play in this built up 
disjecta. We also visit the grounds of an 
uninhabited technical college that has been 
superseded for another campus, casting our voices 
across swathes of unkempt grass towards broad 
concrete ramps and tall buildings of infinite 
bricks, one of which has a clock that has misplaced 
its hands. 

I did the same with my daughter ten years 
ago, bringing her to these lonely spaces to learn to 
play without people, to socialise with geometry, to 
remind myself of where I was most comfortable as 
a young lad, balancing on concrete wheel stops in 


298 


the car parks of the public libraries and tourist 
information centres my parents used to clean. 
And, after hours, sitting in the small parkland 
areas of business courtyards designated as 
employee lunch break quarters during the day, 
repurposed as daydream quarters for sensitive 
children to tend their melancholy of a night. I say 
melancholy, but really what I refer to is a 
heightened state of morality, as one throws a 
fantasy of oneself forwards in time in order to 
inhabit an elasticity, to feel what shapes you might 
need to later become. 

Presently two older boys, scrappy, thin 
limbed lads just on the verge of teenhood, run out 
from beneath the scaffolded seating area 
overlooking the velodrome. They look like they are 
trying to lose somebody who might have been 
chasing them, likely in good humour, as they laugh 
and catch their breath against a metal bench. I 
take stock of where my son and dog are now that 
other souls have infiltrated our previously solitary 
bubble. My son is just behind me, walking across 
the wet grass, and Jonsi is on the high side of the 
track near the Pac Man ghost, his paws dripping 
with mud. One of the lads, the shorter of the two, 
feels around beneath the bench and pulls out a 
pack of cigarettes and a lighter in a plastic bag. 
Jonsi heads over to where the boys are sitting and 
sniffs at their tracksuit pants. The taller boy 
encourages him to jump up, to shake his hand, and 


299 


he sticks his bony face deep into the thick double 
layer of Scandinavian fur that blankets Jonsi. I 
walk towards them and say, hey, careful he doesn’t 
get you all muddy, and the lad jumps up off the 
seat in fright. His face for a second is all grave 
hollow, and I say, it’s all good, I just don’t want you 
to get dirty. 

Some other kids of a similar age, a guy and 
a girl, run up to the lads and, after each taking a 
cigarette, they climb the scaffolded seats and onto 
a shipping container where they sit and look 
towards the first decay of sunlight. The container 
is painted green like plastic army soldiers, and on 
the broad side facing the velodrome entrance 
someone has drip painted a map of sorts, a 
treasure map like you used to see printed on the 
place mats of fast food restaurants. I look for the X 
but, unable to locate it, assume it is beyond the 
map. The kids laugh into each other as the lad who 
patted Jonsi stands up and improvises a song and 
dance routine. He is theatrical, limbs rubbery as 
they swing through space, his elbows extruded like 
pins holding together a hobby store physics 
experiment. I call my son over and he toddles up 
the slope, over High Kitty, and we lead Jonsi out 
towards the gravel car park. 

I follow now as my son runs over to an oval 
shaped puddle the size of which I incorrectly 
imagine a prehistoric egg, like that belonging to a 
triceratops, would have been. Later I would look 


300 


this up and realise that big dinosaurs actually had 
relatively tiny eggs, the size of an asteroid perhaps 
after it has crumbled its way through space and 
landed as a pebble on a shed in someone’s 
backyard. Or are those called meteors. From little 
things big things grow, but as I look at my son I 
think, so too the opposite. We pick up gravel rocks 
and I pass mine to my son to throw into the 
puddle. He throws them one at a time, watching 
each in turn as they arc into the shallow pool. 
Some of the rocks poke their angular points out of 
the water as they settle on the ground. When we 
start to run out of good sized gravel to throw I 
reach in and retrieve some of the rocks I can see 
leaning out of the water, but my son rejects these. 
He knows they have been thrown in already 
because they are wet. No wet, he says. He wants 
rocks that have not already been thrown in, that he 
has not already seen arc and glide from his hand 
into the water. Jonsi is urinating a couple of feet 
away from the puddle. I gather a half handful of 
remaining decent gravel nearby and pass them 
over, where my son examines them before gazing 
long into the water. 


301 


302 


Protection 


PS - Part 1 


Three of us travelled from Adelaide to Port 
Augusta to facilitate a workshop for teachers on 
supporting neurodiverse learning needs in the 
classroom. 

The workshop was almost called off due to 
extreme high temperatures in the region. It was 
my first time travelling through this part of the 
country. 

I was taken by the salt lakes, pink and 
bouncy underfoot like a moon made from buttock, 
the wind farms that knit the clouds together 
through wind tapestry, and the way the Spencer 
Gulf runs up the peninsula as an ever-present line 
of blue on the west that does not transition into 
pastoralism via shore and gradient flax to aureolin 
and straw but rather simply cuts from water to 
infinite arid expanse like two pieces of unrelated 
film seamed together at an arbitrary junction. 

A central motif of Gerald Murnane's 'The 
Plains’ (this rhyme does not appear to me a chance 
occurrence) is of a horizon never reached. Not 
quite Beckett's joke about the life to come (‘Mine 
was always that’) but similar, less about the future 


303 


than the past, about being born with a particular 
subjectivity that is aware of its limits. 

At the end of the first day of our workshop, 
after dinner, I dropped my colleagues off at our 
accommodation near the main bridge across Port 
Augusta's harbour and I went off into the evening 
heat to take a look around. 

There have been numerous attempts over 
the past two decades to articulate a new category 
of diagnosis that may sit alongside certain tenets 
associated with autism and ADHD that has been 
referred to as ‘intense emotional sensitivity’, also 
‘highly sensitive person’ and, already in the 
diagnostic and statistical manual, 'hyper-empathy 
syndrome’. 

I spotted a water tower lookout that I 
drove to and climbed up to take in a panorama of 
the region. Everywhere was monochromatic, 
either dusted in black shadow or fired in orange 
embers, from the water to the flats to the township 
and the mountains against the skyline that would, 
shortly, collapse its light and leave only void. I took 
that view back to my room for the night, a neat 
bedsit walled with corrugated iron, and considered 
a fantasy. 

The fantasy begins like this - a witch anda 
hacker live together in a small regional setting. Say 
they are life partners, they are lovers and 
colleagues, working together in order to do what, 
to perform miracles of nature. 


304 


One of the core literary lessons I have 
taken from Murnane is in consideration to what is 
left in your mind after you put a book down in the 
minutes, months and decades that follow. What 
remains other than, at best, a few strong images. 

With the diagnostic opportunity to classify 
emotional sensitivity, we are presented with a 
strong opportunity to create a punchline about yet 
another facet of being human (all too human) that 
can been pathologised. 

I'm on the affirmative for its consideration. 

Thank the Romantic period, perhaps. Like 
the aesthetic framing of beauty in certain 
prescribed natural spaces, so too the idea of the 
easily wounded individual, the fragile soul, 
someone for whom life is too painful and 
overwhelming and so they turn to a quiet life of 
rural walks, poetry and abundant yearning. 

The witch and the hacker could be set in 
one of Gerald Murnane's eastern-European folk 
story fascinations, a Hungarian village with a deep 
well, a place he has never seen in real life due, 
perhaps, to his unwillingness to use air travel. 

Looking out through the gauze door on my 
accommodation, towards the harbor, 
remembering the panorama, I remembered too 
that I saw a tunnel of smoke billowing. 

Twenty years after reading Ulysses I see a 
stone tower by the ocean, a carriage following a 
hearse, and a faceless huddle of drunk doctors. The 


305 


same period on from Gravity's Rainbow, I see a 
vapour trail from a balcony covered in bananas 
and a mechanical octopus on the beach near a 
casino. 

I have never been in a war zone, but it was 
all too easy to associate a collage of how many 
hundreds of recent amateur video recordings of 
smoke rising from rocket-fall in the Ukraine with 
the rising plumbs I saw fusing with the Flinder's 
Ranges as I thought about the witch and the 
hacker. 

He hacks into the phloem of trees, the 
inner bark pipeline of data that he translates into a 
public vocabulary that the witch then metabolises 
in her brew. 

The second day of our workshop goes well 
and we get on the road at a decent time 
afterwards. 

I say that Murnane has never seen 
Hungary in real life, but he would likely take issue 
with this and conjure his seemingly Heideggerian- 
inspired compound terms. 

After two days of talking about school my 
colleauges and I talk, on the drive home, about our 
own kids and the various challenges they have 
faced across the years, particularly when 
confronted with compliance requirements. 

Say the hacker is approached by an 
astronaut who met an angel in the uppermost 
layer of our atmosphere. 


306 


For Murnane, the image-landscape of 
Hungary and the image-woman who walks up to 
the image-well for water are just as real after 
reading them in a book and casting them to 
memory as walking down the street and 
processing the image-landscape of rural Victoria 
and the image-newsagents and the image-hotel. 

But what about tens of thousands of lines 
of dialogue, of plot trajectories and character 
development. Enjoyed at the time of eyes on the 
page, soon to dissolve into so much forgotten 
minutia in the period beyond the book. 

What if the astronaut and the angel need 
help conceiving. While the hacker and the 
astronaut look towards the smoke on the horizon, 
beyond the wheat fields, imagine a conversation 
between the witch and the angel, about what the 
angel can see from up there, in the exosphere. 

You must attend this many days a week, 
you must complete the assessment task in this 
manner, you must be present in the assembly hall 
for the duration of the period. 

The three of us conceded, on the road 
beyond Port Germein, that as students we were all 
remarkably non-compliant in the face of 
mainstream edusocial mores, hence our current 
employability in teaching educators how to, 
essentially, reject human standardisation. 

To my eyes, the main diagnostic feature of 
emotional sensitivity in the many hundreds of 


307 


students and adults I have lived with over the 
years, present company included, is that they feel 
things too much. 

From an interview with Gerald Murnane, 
question: there are people now who write about 
such feelings of being a little bit separate from the 
world and making lists and making lots of 
categories and would say that that's a slightly 
autistic way to be in the world. 

The title of an article about Murnane, 'An 
Idiot in the Greek Sense’. Another, 'A puzzle: an 
author completely in control, and yet utterly 
uncontrolled’. 

The hacker has an idea involving egg 
incubation via a tree that is launched like a rocket 
into low orbit, but what about the pending war on 
the horizon, the smoke leviathan threading its way 
from the border. 

Imagine a conversation between the witch 
and the angel about what the angel can see from 
up there and how she tells the witch that on high 
the world does not appear as a vessel worth 
preserving, too non-descript and ahistorical, but 
down here, in the dirt, she wants a baby and she 
wants it to thrive. 

The jetty at Port Germein, which we 
turned our car around on the highway to visit after 
reading a sign advertising it as the longest in the 
southern hemisphere, stretches beyond view. 
From memoty it is over one-and-a-half kilometres 


308 


long due to how perpetually low the tide is. I 
watched an image-woman and her two image- 
dogs run across the limitless image-seaweed bed. 

Emotions are too big. When someone else 
feels a negative emotion, like embarrassment or 
shame or fear, the emotionally sensitive person 
will empathise too much and bring it doubly upon 
themselves. 

While they feel too much they nonetheless 
crave emotional experiences, although they learn 
very early on that some emotions can travel down 
a pathway directly, in abundance, into the nerves 
of not just the figurative heart, but the whole literal 
body, causing painful overload. 

And so, they filter and restrict the 
incoming social data (and sensory data, Cartesian 
dualisms be damned) to reduce the potential of 
being hurt. 

Murnane's response to the interview 
question: I may be that way. You asked me a 
question like this once before, and the moment it 
came out of your mouth I bristled, I thought 'I'm 
getting out of here’, but you asked it in a much 
more friendly way today. 

The hacker wonders if they should fight 
the approaching war machine by creating 
weapons. It would only take some minor 
adjustments to the egg incubating tree, by way of 
creating a tree-shaped mechanical fish that 
inverted the conception properties of the original 


309 


design, with sea-launch intracontinental ballistic 
capabilities. 

Driving back to Adelaide feels much 
quicker than the trip to Port Augusta. We arrive 
just before sundown. 

Social vocabulary becomes limited because 
the filter is always up. The highly sensitive person 
wears an opaque lens that clouds the abundance 
of possible emotional dangers. And, with this 
limiting, comes a solitary exploration of 
interiority. 

These explorations may arrive as carefully 
coordinated social fantasies with players on a 
stage, but more often than not they manifest as a 
collapsed, filtered set of core images that provide 
an education, through memory, on the many social 
and sensory lessons observed, but not experienced, 
during youth. 

What if the angel and the astronaut have a 
baby, nursed into life by the witch. The hacker 
travels to a mermaid he and the witch know, she 
lives on the coast. She helps launch a prototype 
mechanical fish rocket out of the water and its 
potential for wartime success is immediately 
apparent. The hacker goes on to dream up more 
weapons. 

In Murnane's writings, from his first 
published work all the way through to his last, the 
same set of visual motifs from childhood that play 
out against, not with, the image-life of his adult 


310 


existence: horse racing (recurrence), fantasies of 
foreignness (life as others must experience it, past 
the horizon of the plains) and all manner of light 
passing through coloured glass, whether through 
marbles or church windows or wherever else 
sunlight can be filtered through an opaque lens, 
the core analogy of his consciousness. 

I drop my colleagues at their hotel and I 
find mine some half dozen blocks towards the 
Botanic Gardens where I see twenty-metre high 
neon signs advertising a, quote, garden of 
unearthly delights, part of what I learn is the 
Adelaide fringe festival. The night air is all heat, 
less so than the regional interior a half-day earlier, 
but still at the upper-reach of balmy. 

There is a magic show that begins in 
twenty minutes for which I buy a ticket. While 
waiting I wander between fairy lights, carnival 
rides, stand-up comedians, a young woman passed 
out beside a circus tent and an identical-looking 
woman walking away on stilts. 

For dinner I buy a bao and a warm 
cinnamon doughnut. 

The term autism is derived from the greek 
‘autos’, meaning ‘self. Locked into the self, 
unaware of others outside the self; unable to 
empathise with others outside the self, nothing 
but rigid, unfeeling, clinical self. 

What we have learned, by listening to 
autistic individuals, is how much some are 


311 


connected, always, to others, and rather than 
lacking empathy they rather experience too much 
of it, over-thinking what others might be thinking 
and feeling, in debilitating abundance. And so, 
they filter. 

In Murnane's self-purported last book in 
which he reviews all the works he has published 
across his life, he ends with a lyric he has written, 
in Hungarian, for some music he has composed. 

The witch and the hacker talk about the 
angel, the astronaut, their newborn baby and the 
military aggressors, a conflagration of armaments, 
marching onwards. 

Similar to how the diagnosis of Asperger's 
became absorbed by the broad categorical reach of 
the autism spectrum so too, in some domains, are 
the boundaries of autism dissolving beside the 
presence of neurodiversity. 

I've had the pleasure of sitting down with 
Judy Singer, the Australian sociologist responsible 
for coining the term, for an afternoon in her living 
room, talking about how the idea of neurodiversity 
is just not an attempt at signaling how we all have 
uniquely different minds, but how valuable this is 
to society, akin the ecological benefits of 
biodiversity. 

The magic show involves acrobatic 
displays involving a Hungarian gymnast who rolls 
on top of a large inflated white balloon. She then 
opens the balloon and sticks her arm in, plugging 


312 


the deflation, and gradually fits her other arm, 
head, torso and, with her legs, her whole body 
inside. She rolls around the stage and when the 
balloon pops it becomes apparent that she has 
disappeared completely. 

Moving on then from _ diagnostic 
categories, of this being autism and this being 
ADHD and this being sensory-processing disorder 
and this being hyper-empathy syndrome and so 
on, what interests me most in an age of 
neurodiversity (see: the Romantic period) are the 
profound interiorities we gain access too through 
the uniquely channelled, filtered sensitivities of 
individuals who find sustained methods for giving 
light to their reflections. 

Would it be an ironic historical twist if the 
highest quality and most sensitive depictions of 
human subjectivity were those derived from a 
subset of the population slandered as lacking 
emotions and a capacity for empathy, or would it 
be a long-game justification of the word ‘autos’ / 
‘self’. 

The last lyric, translated into English, that 
Murnane puts to music, is 'Help me, dear one, to 
ensure patiently my going back to my own sort of 
heaven’. 

And I imagine the hacker telling the 
astronaut, before sending a message through to 
the mermaid to commence the rocket sequence, to 
put their baby to sleep in his space suit tonight, for 


313 


warmth. 

The walk back to the hotel does not take 
long, and it is only a short time after this that 
everything turns white. 


314 


315 


316 


Sandsync 


PS - Part 2 


Quote from Les Murray: It has taken me 
this long to get some idea of what the other people 
are thinking. I used to refer to them as the 
humans, you know - ‘what are the humans 
thinking about’ - seeing myself as a bit of a 
stranger to the human race and trying to work it 
out. 

I arrived home in Newcastle late last night 
and when I woke (late) this morning my family 
had already gone off in their own directions for the 
day. My work travels from the week owed me time 
in lieu, so I take my leave now (today), wipe sleep 
from my eyes and walk to the ferry on the harbour. 

The little olive and khaki-toned tub chugs 
across the Hunter River, blending in its wake the 
sparkle of blue sky mirror into a milky froth as if a 
centrifuge were harvesting foam from shimmer to 
later be collected and pressed against the horizon 
in a smudge of faded mountain or pending cloud 
arrangement. 

A memory from the past, driving through 
Hunter Street past a war memorial. My daughter, 
thirteen, asked if the statue was wearing khaki and 


317 


then my son, three, said car key, the soldier has a 
car key, and he thought it was a terrific joke. 

Reading through some e-mails before 
butting up against the Stockton shoreline, I see 
one from a chap who runs an on-again off-again 
pirate radio station across Newcastle, 89.3 FM. The 
other week I sent him two recent tracks I'd 
finished and he put them on rotation. It turns out, 
from this e-mail, that one of the tracks has been 
receiving a lot of positive feedback from an online 
community of 89.3 enthusiasts and he's cueing it 
up every other hour. 

Twenty-something years on from when 
the astronaut placed his and the angel's baby in 
one of his space suits just before a white flash 
rendered finale we meet a woman living in a heat 
haze desertscape. She is looking against the 
horizon for her partner, who wandered off days 
ago from their dwindling community of tent folk 
to look for water. 

Stockton seems a little closer to the sun 
than Newcastle, which is foolish as the area is 
visibly lower but it is the abundance of sand and 
the way the peninsula interpolates beach into city 
with increasing resonance until only endless ivory 
dunes remain, beyond name or map designation, 
that makes it feel particularly solar. 

This runs counter to the many occasions I 
have considered that moon and beach are 
analogies for one another. The sun is not a beach 


318 


although of course its body creates sand. At one 
stage the moon would have been a droplet of ice 
floating towards the sun until an atomic greeting 
furnaced it into a big ball of chalky sand. 

My hair has grown too long in the wrong 
direction so I walk down the main street of 
Stockton to find a barber. On the way I see a 
charity clothing store that has a display in its 
window of white plates with Sweet Peas painted 
on, a teapot nestled within a royal blue crotched 
cosy and, what sends me inside, a small plastic 
portable radio. The elderly man serving shows me 
how it turns on and generously pops a couple of 
new batteries in it. 

I figure the radio on the street and tune it 
between bands of static to pick up ghost 
monologues and AM strings. This is the first time 
in how many years I have held music in my hand 
without the potential of a phone call coming in, 
but of course like a well-timed punchline I then 
hear the tut-tut-tut signal interference through the 
speaker as my phone receives a text message. 

From ‘Portrait Of The Autist As A New 
World Driver' where Les Murray describes how A 
car is also a high speed hermitage, questioning who 
would put in a telephone, that merciless foot-in-the-door 
of realities. 

And, Under the overcoming undimishing sky 
you are barely supervised: you can let out language to 
exercise. 


319 


Exercise is one thing, but the perfection of 
it is something else. That's what I keep returning 
to, why this form of literary writing for those 
within this spectrum of emotional and sensory 
sensitivity. It is not coincidence that the two 
Australian authors of the present generation 
deemed most likely to win a Nobel Prize have both 
been aligned with autism. 

Riddle: consider what made John Maxwell 
Coetzee say that Murray is ‘not a poet of the inner 
life’, that he ‘instead relies on an acute sensitivity 
to sensory impressions and an extraordinary 
capacity to articulate them’, and the relationship 
between this comment and the manner in which 
both Coetzee (now a longterm resident of 
Australia), Murray and Murnane have all been 
referred to as, quote, a little bit autistic (never the 
full diagnosis, always on the border districts). 

Looking for her partner, the woman 
applies her dust filtration apparatus and walks 
into the desert where, after a half-day trek, she 
comes across a small grove of flowers. They are 
paper brittle natives, nothing out of the ordinary, 
but the grove structure is unique, a walled 
hemisphere of stepped foliage, feathered salt that 
masks a drop in temperature sourced from 
behind. 

Eager for some food I push through the 
plastic blinds of a fish and chip shop and order 
some battered whiting. Sitting and waiting 


320 


outside I try to tune the radio in to 89.3 but I'm 
unsure whether I've got a clear signal and I'm 
listening to a piece of experimental post-rock art 
noise or whether it's just detuned hiss. Either way 
it sounds like my sort of thing so I set the volume 
to a considerately low public level and enjoy. 

After lunch (soft white fillet reuleaux 
triangles folding and separating) I walk down a 
pebblecrete arcade and spot a barber shop beside a 
tobacconists. I head in and get shown straight to a 
seat where a young man just out of high school 
asks me what I'd like (I put my hands out in a 
pleading fashion, whatever it takes to make me 
look my age in a non-ridiculous manner, but 
where should the clippers take their lead from the 
scissors, just do your best). 

Asked what I do for work I mention 
autism and my barber nods, I know a bit about 
that, he says. My girlfriend and I, we took an 
online test the other week and if you scored eighty 
you probably had autism. I scored around sixty, 
my girlfriend got over one hundred. 

He said that he personally has an ADHD 
diagnosis with perhaps a few autistic traits. What 
sort of traits - well I talk a lot, he says. And I kind 
of daydream I guess. 

My girlfriend though, he says, she's an 
accountant. He says I remember when we first 
went to meet my family at someone's house for 
lunch, my girlfriend cried on the way there, she 


321 


was so nervous. And she doesn't like watching 
movies because she thinks they're all cruel, the 
characters, it doesn't matter if it's a comedy or 
action. 

From ‘It Allows a Portrait in Line-Scan at 
Fifteen’ where Murray talks about his son who 
used to attend the same school I taught at for 
many years: He has forgotten nothing, and remembers 
the precise quality of experiences. 

What if the woman pushes her dust 
filtration mask back and wedges her body between 
shafts of paper leaf and wall-dusted melaleuca to 
find a hole in the ground. She can hear a shout wet 
with reverberation - help. It is her partner. 

She fashions a rope from twisted wonga 
wonga and lowers it down a long, long way. 

I walk out to the breakwater and look 
across the channel to the opposite breakwater on 
Newcastle's peninsula that extends out beyond 
Nobby's lighthouse. This is the first time I have 
stood on the Stockton side after having looked out 
at it for how many years. 

There is a shipwreck, the Adolphe, cast 
against the rocks two-thirds of the way towards 
the breakwater endpoint. A metal plaque reads 
that it was built in Dunkirk in 1902, a French ship, 
and was only two years old when it sailed from 
Antwerp to Newcastle and, a word I've not read 
before in this context - foundered - on the oyster 
bank at the mouth of the harbour. 


322 


Looking down at the spinal remnants of 
the Adolphe, like the skeletal remnants of a gutted 
length of whiting, I think of Les Murray's major 
novel in verse 'Fredy Neptune’. 

The major plot catalyst occurs ten stanzas 
in, a tragic violent event observed by the 
protagonist (a group of women in Turkey, during 
World War I, being burned to death) which results 
in the protagonist, huddled in the sick bed of a 
ship, losing his sense of touch. His body is 
rendered white and numb and is assumed by those 
around him to be a form of leprosy. 

He is put ashore quickly and left on the 
coastal flanks of Turkey to beg and survive (A bad 
place for a Dungog man, waiting for bits to rot off 
him). But of course he is not leprotic, he is 
traumatised. Our protagonist has witnessed an 
event that has caused him to feel it on and in his 
body so intensely that he is no longer receptive to 
external stimuli. 

His fellow sailors witnessed the same 
event but were not reported to have suffered in the 
same way. 

What is the internal drive for the 
emotionally sensitive soul to render the world in 
beatific language. We know from neuroscience 
that reading turns the same lights on in the brain 
that experience does - it simulates, synthesises, the 
act of living. 

And if reading is a surrogate for living, 


323 


then what is writing but a way to daydream 
concretely. To remember through representation, 
marked by lines on a page, in ways not accessible 
by way of any other medium, forged in isolation, 
safe from social harm (a good place for a Dungog 
man). 

On the beach near the breakwater now, 
not the side of the beach that is rapidly slipping 
into the ocean, the other side where dogs tumble 
over mounds of coastal spinifex, I sit with the 
radio and try 89.3 again and get a stronger signal 
this time, still weak but with more form. There are 
beats, those are certain. 

While the woman is down in the cavern 
with her partner he shows her a miracle. There is a 
lake down there, unheard of to see a full body of 
water in this age. She bathes in the underground 
waters and feels something change within. A voice 
speaks between her bones. After many hours they 
climb back out to the surface. 

When Les Murray was invited to give a 
poetry reading at a bowling club in Taree in early 
1988 it was a moment for the local son now 
national literary hero to enjoy a victory lap on his 
home return. What he didn't anticipate was a 
former classmate cheerfully greeting him after the 
reading by reminding him of one of the cruel 
nicknames she had given him during their school 
years. 

Within days Murray is barely functional. 


324 


His physical sensory system is topsy-turvy and his 
emotional and cognitive world is fractured. Like 
the protagonist from Fredy Neptune he 
experiences an overwhelm of pain that is replaced 
by a dissociated state which, as recorded in his 
memoir 'Killing the Black Dog', manifests as 
depression. 

From Fredy Neptune, 'No pain, nor pleasure. 
Only a ghost of that sense that tells you where the parts 
of you are' and 'It isn't hard to do from memory: curse 
when burnt, hunch when you see it's cold, don't hammer 
fingers or let your leg bend to the pop! stage’. 

When Coetzee said that Murray is not a 
poet of the inner life but rather focuses on sensory 
impressions, I want to respond and note that it is 
through sensory impressions that the inner life is 
revealed. Emotional sensitivity is worn on the skin. 

Taking the ferry back to Newcastle, little 
plastic radio in hand, I have a mind to take a swim 
at the Bogey Hole to round off the afternoon 
before I head home. 

After a time the woman and her partner 
realise she is pregnant. This is another miracle as 
natural pregnancies have not been recorded 
within the fictional structures of this narrative for 
generations. The woman herself was of course 
birthed into being some twenty years ago via 
nature hacking when the witch and the hacker 
established a way for her parents, the astronaut 
and the angel, to imagine new life. 


325 


Which means, doesn't it, that it isn't a 
stretch to consider that the weapon the hacker 
initiated that created that vaporising whiteness 
from which the woman, the baby in the astronaut 
suit, was protected from, was also what created 
that lake of life giving water beneath the desert 
sands. It gave life to the daughter of the astronaut 
and the angel and now it has given her too the 
capacity to generate life. 

Was this how the hacker and the witch 
ethically justified the weapon, to defeat the war 
effort by erasing everybody as a sacrifice for 
beginning life again. 

Les Murray opens nearly all of his books 
with the same line - To the glory of God. 

And what was it that Jesus said in Matthew 
10 - Do not think that I have come to bring peace to the 
earth; I have not come to bring peace, but a sword. 

The Bogey Hole, convict built in the early 
days of British imperial rule, is a shard of 
opalescent sky pressed deep into the earth, into 
the presiding caves, of the coastal shelf. There are 
around two dozen other bathers playing in the 
water, but I am only nominally aware they exist as 
I float at the edges of the pool beside my radio 
receiving full reception here. And hey, what do you 
know - they're playing my song. 


326 


327 


328 


The Body of this Story 


This story is about Dostoevsky and 
Euripides and The Red Baron and Hatsune Miku 
and Dr Sidney Freedman and The Michelin Man 
and Terry Thomas and Rei Ayanami and Isaiah 
Berlin and Thomas Bernhard and Raskolnikov and 
Bill Hicks and Albert Camus’ mother in her chair 
on the balcony not really hearing or saying 
anything for long stretches of time and Hawkeye 
Pierce when he tells Sidney Freedman about the 
smell of a wet burlap sack and how similar the 
melody to Komm, stisser Tod sounds to the 
Hatsune Miku song Because You're Here and Terry 
Thomas asking Someone you know of Jonathan 
Winters and the Asterix comic where they come 
across The Michelin Man outside a motel or a 
service station from memory or the equivalent in 
Ancient Gaul which I think might have been added 
for an anglicised version of the story as the 
original had a French character that might not 
have been well known outside its country of origin 
again this is from memory and The Hedgehog and 
The Fox and choosing exile in one’s old age like 
Euripides although this is contested now like 
Dostoyesvky’s gambling debts but how he asked a 
friend to tell him all about children in a letter the 


329 


330 


games they play and mannerisms and so on for the book 
that came to be The Brothers Karamazov with little 
remaining really of what we might have thought a book 
about children would include unless a young version of 
Raskolnikov perhaps or when Bill Hicks talks about a 
scene from Shane that nobody has ever been able to track 
down where he says pick up the gun as a metaphor for 
American foreign policy and Isaiah Berlin when he was 
mistaken for Irving Berlin and White Christmas and 
opening a present on Christmas morning and Thomas 
Bernhard pops out and wheezes about Austria bless him 
and The Red Baron only twenty five when he died shot 
down by an Australian gunner if the story is to be 
believed which it should I suppose so far as memory can 
be trusted which just ask Hawkeye about such matters he 
might just start sneezing again like Albert Camus when 
he kept retiring to his bed on that cross Atlantic boat 
journey when his tuberculosis would flare up only 
seventeen when he was diagnosed same age give or take 
some months when Thomas Bernhard was diagnosed 
with the same age give or take when Hatsune Miku went 
on tour but the production company decided to not bring 
the hologram projection technology along which is the 
whole point the voice is not enough where is the body tell 
me Raskolnikov where is the body Terry Thomas 
frantically saying Have a care, that chap’s run absolutely 
amok or to quote Euripides love makes the time pass and 
time makes love pass if he actually ever said that or when 
Isaiah Berlin said he’d rather be remembered as serious 
and grave rather than funny which I know the feeling 


even though Nietzsche would be disgusted the memory 
where I hold a girl’s hand when I am a boy in early 
schooling and a friend holds her other hand and laughs 
and I frown at him and shake my head no you must not 
laugh while we dance in a circle I want her to take this 
seriously this is a melancholy moment where I want 
everyone to be as quiet as possible so she can hear the 
noise my heart is making in her memory or the 
equivalent (Where is the body? It never left). 


331 


332 


Hesse 


LI 

When I turned forty, I began re-reading 
stories and essays that Hermann Hesse wrote 
when he turned forty. 

There is just over a century between us. 
One hundred and six years, two months and 
eleven days. 

We're practically brothers. 


LI 

When I was sixteen I first read Demian. A 
friend loaned me a copy from his father’s library. 

Hesse wrote Demian when he turned 
forty. World War I was a graveyard of ghosts and 
ashes and so was he. 

After the disintegration of his family, his 
country and his previous model of reality, he went 
off to live alone. 


333 


LIII 

From this position, Hesse developed a new 
line of enquiry within his works that significantly 
built on his earlier thinking. 

He doubled down hard on a central thesis: 
the only true thing is the voice you hear inside of 
yourself. 

To quote from Demian - 'Gaze into the 
fire, into the clouds, and as soon as the inner 
voices begin to speak, surrender to them. Don't ask 
first whether it's permitted, or would please your 
teachers or father or some god. You will ruin 
yourself if you do that.’ 

As well, from the same year that book was 
published, 1919, in a letter to a young German - 
‘Search where you may, no prophet or teacher can 
relieve you of the need to look within. Our mission 
is solely to remind you that there is a god and only 
one god; he dwells in your hearts, and it is there 
that you must seek him out and speak with him.’ 


LIV 

The model of truth that Hesse weaves 
through his works is tied to the same thread 
initially spun by Nietzsche that would, in time, 
come to trip up the whole twentieth-century 
apparatus of knowing anything with certainty. 

Well, maybe it didn’t start with Nietzsche - 
maybe it was Pyrrho of Elis or Zeno of Elea, or 


334 


someone else from Classical antiquity who 
wondered if everything was neither binary (this or 
that) or infinity (everything) but rather both 
divided into each other, indivisibly, forever. But it 
was Nietzsche who made it modern and gave it a 
catch phrase. 

Supposing that truth is a woman, says one 
of the loneliest men in Switzerland in 1885. What 
then - when truths are merely illusions that we 
have forgotten are illusions, when everything is 
perspective, when that’s just your opinion, when 
we, the ones trying to swoon truth, are dynamic 
multiplicities of drives and forces forever in flux. 
When god is dead tired and didn’t have time to 
finish all the details on a subatomic quantum level, 
because who would ever think to look there, reality 
is still being constructed, just wait a little longer. 

And so you get Nietzsche into Heidegger, 
World War I and Dada, Niels Bohr and Werner 
Heisenberg, World War II into poststructuralism 
and postmodernism, Wrestlemania and reality 
television, twenty-four-hour news channels, the 
internet, artificial intelligence hallucinating. Or, in 
a nutshell, the deity is in you, says Hesse - ‘truth is 
lived, not taught’ (you are the shell and the nut is 
opening up). 

The Guardian this morning, after the 
election, ran an ad that says - ‘This is the moment 
for truth, help us protect it’. 


335 


LV 

In Hesse’s description of the time he spent 
in his forties at a spa in Baden, recovering from ill 
health (of both a physical and nervous dimension, 
so says the doctor, the old Cartesian dualism, head 
and body, but Hesse channels the spirit of the age 
and says no, there is another possible diagnosis), 
he describes going downstairs into the catacombs 
of the health resort he’s staying, the stone 
basement where the hot baths are readied for 
guests and, upon reclining into the water and 
looking up into the high ceilings, he sees soft light 
from the aboveground world peeling through 
windows down into his morning eyes. 

After World War II, a Japanese fan of 
Hesse’s wrote to him in a state of great idolatry - 
Hesse had shown him the truth about life, and 
now this fan wanted to write his own works, in 
homage to Hesse, to deliver the word to others. 
The reply letter was harsh, paraphrasing 
Nietzsche, always (‘this is my way, where is yours? 
To those who ask me the way, I tell you, the way 
does not exist’), but not without reference to 
another window, like that one at the spa - I am not 
a source of light to bathe in, Hesse tells his young 
Japanese colleague, I am a window that simply 
does its best to allow light to pass through. 


336 


LVI 

There is a narrative of the twentieth 
century that runs like this - community lost out to 
the individual. As folks started believing in 
institutions less and less (for good reason, right? 
Hesse is the non-conformist model for this 
trajectory - think of that line from Demian about 
listening to yourself, and ‘don't ask first whether 
it's permitted, or would please your teachers or 
father or some god’: schools crush the spirit, 
parents do what Larkin later put to verse, and the 
church is irrelevant, to say nothing of the horrors 
enacted by the ruling class to manifest World War 
I and II. Who would ever want to listen to anybody 
else ever again?), collectives dwindled. 

Across the century we moved into housing 
developments in satellite towns, neighbourhoods 
of neighbours avoiding neighbours because 
everybody was running late for the expressway, it 
takes fifty minutes in good traffic just to make it to 
work on time, if you don’t have to stop for petrol 
(which you do, for sugar and coffee if nothing 
else). Our unions lost collective bargaining power 
and our political movements lost agency because 
everybody was focused on their own plot. 
Capitalism found a way to turn our loneliness into 
a marketable package, selling niche sub-genres of 
clothing and music, your own personal style, 
where you can express who you really are (gone are 
the days of everybody wearing hats, let your 
mohawk and feathers plume). 


337 


LVII 

This is how the counter-cultural 
movement found its wings, and they took Hesse 
for a prophet. During the sixties and seventies, 
Hesse became less about his roots in the German 
Romanticism of Goethe and Nietzsche and more 
about Timothy Leary and LSD. Leary anointed 
Hesse the poet of the interior journey. The exotica 
of Eastern Spirituality became very important in 
the search for truth (set in motion two centuries 
earlier by Schopenhauer, timed neatly between 
Goethe and Nietzsche, or was it Britain’s colonial 
rule over the Indian subcontinent from 1858, or the 
availability a century later of increasingly 
affordable airline journeys to Asia from Los 
Angeles, of globalisation, of some other truth), 
Buddhist yearnings and pilgrimages to India 
which seemed to bow a string from Ravi Shankar’s 
sitar collaboration with George Harrison through 
to nineties acid rave culture (when I was reading 
Hesse) towards the approach of Y2K, dreams at the 
end of history, how many Geocities websites 
seemed to celebrate the Hale-Bop comet. And 
then, September 11, weapons of mass destruction, 
mobile phones, the end of Britannica 
Encyclopaedia, the end of Encarta, it’s all on a 
Wiki, from the Hawaiian ‘wiki wiki’ meaning fast, 
the speed of truth when truth is crowd-sourced. 


338 


LVIII 

There is a peculiar book I bought twenty 
years ago called ‘C.G. Jung and Hermann Hesse: A 
Record of Two Friendships’. The subject matter 
isn’t the peculiar part - it’s a book written by a 
Chilean Diplomat about going over to meet with 
Hesse and Jung during their old age, to talk about 
all sorts of cosmic things: myths, archetypes, 
symbols, and so on. The conversations with Hesse 
don’t add much to our understanding his work, 
but the conversations with Jung are interesting for 
reasons I'll share, but first, the reason the book is 
peculiar is that its author, Miguel Serrano, who 
comes across as fairly innocuous with his take on 
spiritual topics, was, it turns out, a proponent of 
what he called Esoteric Hitlerism. He was a 
prominent Nazi sympathiser and shared the idea 
that after World War II, some Nazis escaped to a 
subterranean world inside our hollow earth, 
establishing secret bases, particularly in 
Antarctica. 

Is that what happens when you treat your 
own truth as paramount? Did Serrano look inside 
of himself and find a world of Nazi leaders 
migrating towards the core of our planet to set up 
a base for their future plans? I'll tell you the 
interesting conversation he has with Jung - there is 
a section in which Serrano talks about wanting to 
isolate and meditate and find a way to know 
himself, his unconsciousness, well enough to 


339 


resonate some sense of peace and understanding 
into the world (to defeat Communism, if I’m 
reading him correctly); anyway, Jung replies by 
telling him that, quote, “nobody can become aware 
of his individuality unless he is closely and 
responsibly related to his fellow beings, he is not 
withdrawing to an egoistic desert when he tries to 
find himself. He can only discover himself when he 
is deeply and unconditionally related to some, and 
generally related to a great many, individuals with 
whom he has a chance to compare, and from 
whom he is able to discriminate himself. If 
somebody in supreme egoism should withdraw to 
the solitude of Mt. Everest, he would discover a 
good deal about the amenities of his lofty abode, 
but as good as nothing about himself, i.e. nothing 
he could not have known before’. 


LIX 

The year after Demian was published, 
Hesse, having left his family home, his family, his 
life, goes on a wander, alone. I wonder what Hesse 
would have thought about Jung’s sentiment here, 
that truth, consciousness, is a shared experience. 
Crowd-sourced. The brief book of prose, poems 
and watercolour illustrations that Hesse created 
on his wander called, wait for it, Wandering, talks 
a great deal about enjoying his solitude and 
learning much about himself through the absence 
of other people. “The world has become lovelier”’, 


340 


he writes, “I am alone, and I don’t suffer from my 
loneliness.” He does use the word ‘alone’ quite a lot 
though, like when he says, “The way to salvation 
leads neither to the left nor the right: it leads into 
your own heart, and there alone is god, and there 
alone is peace”. 

But peace is a contentious word here. 
During both world wars, Hesse was castigated 
from both sides for his constant pacifism - he was 
accused of anti-patriotism by fellow Germans for 
not being in favour of the war, and harangued by 
anti-war folk for not protesting enough. He was 
approached by many who asked him to contribute 
to their activism - Max Brod, famous for being 
Franz Kafka’s friend and, ultimately, not burning 
Kafka’s writings after his death even after explicit 
instruction from Kafka to do so. He took Kafka’s 
manuscripts with him to Palestine after the Nazis 
occupied Prague, and when the 1948 Arab-Israeli 
war was heating up, Brod wrote to Hesse and 
asked him to lend his voice to the protest against 
the war, that his name, two years after Hesse had 
won the Nobel Prize, would make a difference. 
Hesse said no. “Our business is not to preach or to 
command or to plead but to stand fast amid hells 
and devils.” 

He then goes on to say that he knows 
people will accuse him of being “one of those 
dreamy artists who believe that art has nothing to 
do with politics, that an artist must live in an 


341 


aesthetic ivory tower for fear of corrupting his 
vision by contact with crude reality, or soiling his 
hands”, but this was not Hesse’s position. His 
stance was that as a writer, he should focus on 
reminding his “readers of the fundamental 
commandments of humanity”. And again, as he 
wrote to a young German in 1919, he suggests 
looking within oneself - to not be twisted and 
crushed by the machinations of politics and war, 
to know oneself well enough to say no to fascism, 
to say no to totalitarianism and violence and terror 
and prejudice: what more can be offered? If you 
can be sure enough of yourself to navigate the 
ethical mountains of our time, is this not its own 
form of activism (as long as you aren’t Miguel 
Serrano, although who knows what he actually 
found in himself and what sort of demons he 
conjured in his own troubled ego and took him to 
Hesse and Jung in the first place). 


LX 

If Hesse is right and truth is found 
through self-reflection, and if we recognise that 
the twentieth century has been a bit of a mess so 
far as truth-seeking goes, where even mathematics 
couldn’t escape falsification and paradox (thanks 
Godel), and if we consider the political critique of 
self that says through our individualism we've 
abandoned any opportunity to gather together as a 


342 


collective in order to exert power against our 
oppressors, and that while journalism seeks our 
support for its attempts at truth-telling, it’s still 
pretty difficult to trust any sort of authority 
outside of ourselves, then it should also be said 
that when Hesse talks about truth, he’s rarely 
talking about it remaining in its singular form. 
Jung said that we shouldn’t withdraw to an 
egoistic desert to find ourselves, but Hesse might 
say that’s not even possible, because the truth is so 
plentiful, that we contain such multitudes, we are 
more than enough to keep ourselves company. 
What begins as a single truth, for Hesse, a 
single vision of what it is to be human, is always, 
time and again in his work, taken on a journey of 
fragmentation, like white light through a prism, in 
which that initial, single truth then splits into 
many resonating truths. An infinite number of 
truths. This brings us into contact with some 
mystical, universal spectrum of existence that is 
less often named than it is visualised. It is Hesse’s 
way of saying that from that quiet voice inside of 
you springs a symphony of voices; and not just 
voices, we hear all manner of instruments, even 
those not invented yet, and all sounds from the 
animal kingdom, and nature, both shy petal flutter 
during the late afternoon and the drone of tectonic 
plates pressing into each other beneath the ocean 
floor; this is what resounds when a quiet, 
uncertain soul with a shaky voice decides to shout 


343 


‘T into the heart of the world. 

To quote from Klingsor’s Last Summer, 
also written in 1919, that year when everything 
changed for Hesse, describing a self-portrait that 
the artist, Klingsor, has painted at the end of the 
story, at the end of his last Summer: 

“The face is painted like a landscape, the 
hair reminiscent of leaves and the bark of trees, 
the eye sockets like clefts in rock.. he painted many 
faces into his picture: sweet and wondering 
children’s faces, young manhood’s brow and 
temples, full of dreams and ardour, scoffing 
drinker’s eyes, lips of a thirsting, persecuted, 
suffering, seeking libertine.. the face of the 
doomed and decaying man who accepted his face: 
moss grew on his skull, the old teeth stood askew, 
cracks ran through the white skin.. and still more 
remotely, still deeper behind all these faces, slept 
remoter, deeper, older faces, prehuman, animal, 
vegetable, stony, as if the last man on earth in the 
moment before death were recalling once again 
with the speed of dream all the forms of past ages 
when the universe was young.. he sensed with a 
deep faith that in this cruel struggle with his self- 
portrait more than the face and the final 
accounting of an individual was involved, that he 
was doing something human, universal, 
necessary.. he conquered and was defeated, he 
suffered and laughed and fought his way through, 
killed and died, gave birth and was born”. 


344 


The act of Klingsor painting his self- 
portrait is a metaphor describing the trajectory 
that a truth observed within oneself follows, if you 
have the courage enough to stay with it. ‘The truth 
has a million faces’, Hesse would later go on to say, 
‘but there is only one truth’. 

And in all seriousness, it does take courage 
- looking into yourself, really looking, isn’t easy. 
It’s not like wondering what to have for dinner, or 
whether to drive or walk to the shops: it’s about 
knowing what to do when you're asked to join the 
cause, to lend your voice to the party line, to know 
where to stand. To take a final line from Demian, 
from when Hesse was forty and speaking directly 
to my sixteen-year-old self: ‘I wanted only to live in 
accord with the promptings which came from my 
true self. Why was that so very difficult?” 


345 


346 


To Weave, To Fabricate 


Art that works is art 


that fails, because intentions 
are arrows that hit when they miss - 


a mistake read closely says all 
that human planning cannot: 


the revelation is in the breach. 


347 


348 


Sovereignty is an Artificial Soul 


'eedieAi and uddyunnunoan' 
Lyrebird, Les Murray 


Introduction, or The Leviathan Chews On 
Flowers From The Cyberpastoralist Meadow 
Of A Data Drunk Fantasy Spreading Its Wings 
at the Wit’s End of Imagination. 


A dear friend shared an idea with me when 
we were sixteen. He wondered if it would be 
possible to tell the future by having access to 
enough data on what everybody was doing and 
thinking. If you could map all the data and see 
where that person was walking to, what that 
person was thinking about, and what the weather 
was doing to that person's decisions, you could 
predict the subsequent tick of the second hand on 
the universe's clock, of what would follow. 

Later, we would learn this is how 
meteorology and economics and all manner of 
predictive science operates, but at the time it felt 
revelatory. Looking back through history, that 
feeling reappears often - Thomas Hobbes thought 


349 


his Leviathan could operate in this manner by 
regulating society through rational algorithms, 
and the twentieth century found in computer 
ecosystems the ability to manifest this dream: 
every KPI, every standardised school assessment, 
every recommended video as a monarch of 
systemic maintenance. 

Now, with engineers seemingly on the 
verge of achieving the white whale of binary 
computation - artificial general intelligence - this 
dream is once again ramping up. I understand the 
dream because, in part, it's what I dream about, 
too. When, in Dostoyevsky's 'The Brothers 
Karamazov’, the question of evil is raised in the 
Rebellion section, it is debated whether or not evil 
should be looked at closely or simply turned away 
from, whether it is too ugly, too human, for 
rational consideration. 

If I thought it was possible to eradicate 
acts of human evil simply by training the laser 
focus of a civilisation’s worth of artificially 
intelligent mathematics at it, with all the necessary 
philosophical parameters in place, what would I 
say? 

At the same time this vision of a puzzle 
society solved by super-algorithms and data 
analysis is being had, other events are in play. Art 
is facing an existential threat unlike any it has yet 
faced. Just when we thought computers were 
simply going to work on chess, gene therapy and 


350 


stock markets, it came for our art, poetry and 
music (and, one would assume, dance, once robots 
are fluid enough to tango). 

Artists appear to be saying they'll just carry 
on without concern, and/or they'll rage against the 
machine and inject their original creations with 
viral code to corrupt future mutated remixes, and/ 
or they'll cozy up to technology and collaborate 
with the latest software. Recently, I've been 
wondering, as I think about Dostoyevsky and our 
capacity to address bad stuff, if The Arts as we 
know them may one day come to an end (as before, 
so after) to be replaced by a new disruptive 
trajectory for output. 

Hold that thought - the other week, a 
newspaper in Australia ran an article about the 
rise of ADHD diagnoses, a mirror-headline to the 
thousands of others across the decades on the rise 
of autism and so on. Reading the article, and then 
the comments on the article, it was clear the usual 
responses were coming through: our diagnostic 
tools are always getting better at detecting the 
intricate conditions of neurodiversity, there is less 
social stigma now about being open about these 
things. 

But there was an interesting thread in the 
comments on the article that was mining another 
point, the social model of disability: are the work 
and lifestyle expectations of people today simply 
not suitable for those who are neurodiverse, hence 


351 


seeing more people struggle with daily life in 
school, at work and in relationships? Or, put 
another way, has the version of the world we are 
living in been designed in a particular way to help 
a subset of society achieve maximum success at 
the exclusion of others? 

Civilisation is a sequence of dominant 
dreams conjured by a few powerful people to 
provide them and those like them with the 
maximum ability to retain and expand that power. 
We are all living in somebody else's dream, 
somebody's Leviathan. I'm living in the dream of 
capitalist economists who arbitrate the value of 
groceries and celebrity wages and war, of 
technologists who taught me to mediate digital 
affection, of proxy behaviourists who showed me 
how to look someone in the face and smile broadly 
with an outstretched hand ready to grip and move 
north and south. 

There is a connecting narrative here: the 
social contract we’re signing when we show 
artificial intelligence the menu being served at the 
Big Data Buffet; the role of the artist in a post-art 
culture; and, the subterfuge of our dreams at the 
End of History. 

Data is life, all art is theft, and the future is 
cancelled - all is right with the world. 


352 


Set 1: To bring to bloom the 
million-petalled flower 


If, two years ago, you had told my father 
that it would be possible to type a half-dozen 
words describing a scene of his choosing, and then 
a half-dozen more words describing the art genre 
of his choice, and that thirty seconds later there 
would manifest a visual masterpiece depicting 
exactly what was requested, he would have 
squinted his eyes and wondered how much of the 
cooking sherry you'd been into. 

Today, estimates are somewhere in the 
ballpark of Midjourney and Dall-E and Stable 
Diffusion generating around four million images a 
day. What was, mere months ago, a seemingly 
impossible act of computation, is now so routine 
for most internet-savvy folk that it barely registers 
interest. On the contrary, it yields a stream of 
complaints about hands not perfectly formed 
(even the Old Masters didn’t let their apprentices 
paint hands, perhaps AI is simply following the 
same gambit) which feels to me somewhat like 
complaining about the markings on a card deck 
used in a magic trick. 

This process of proceeding from wonder 
through to boredom with technological marvels is 
not new - we could invoke Max Weber’s 
“Disenchantment of the World” here, sliding from 


353 


the magical through to the material - and is 
experienced any time we grumble about a plane 
journey without gripping someone by the 
shoulders and exclaiming how incredible it is to 
have an opportunity to fly above the ground. 
However, I feel there is something critically 
important about not letting this moment of AI 
wonder fade into sour routine without capitalising 
on the possibility this dream-state might allow us. 
Perhaps let us do this, first, not by manifesto, but 
by meditation. 


Set 2: Dream Baby Dream 


There is a political narrative of the 
twentieth century that goes like this: after a few 
centuries of scientific revolution, from Copernicus 
to Darwin, casting off old systems of metaphysical 
power and embracing the rational potentials of 
being human with feet firmly planted in the soil of 
Nietzchean hillsides, with revolutions here and 
there promising power to the people, a hundred 
years of -isms rapidly dawned. 

Then, once the End of History was 
announced during the nineties and solidified after 
9/11, all remaining -isms were either marked as 
suspect or sacred, with no future revisions 


354 


necessary: Communism was out, Biological 
Determinism was in; Modernism was out, 
Nationalism was in. Not only were no future 
revisions necessary, but they were impossible. 
Slavoj Zizek and Mark Fisher were both fond of 
saying that it is easier to imagine the cinematic 
asteroid-laden alien-invaded ocean-waves-like- 
skyscrapers-descending end of the world than it is 
to imagine slight changes to funding healthcare 
and public education, to say nothing of policy 
adjustments to critical environmental issues or 
antecedents to crime and poverty. 

Which, according to the narrative, is the 
position we are in now: the potential for a 
different tomorrow has been cancelled, and we are 
stuck in a _ state of perpetual foreverism 
(something Grafton Tanner argues well, taking up 
Mark Fisher’s mantle that our culture, thanks to 
the tenets of ultra-efficient capitalist production, 
is now locked into a nostalgia loop where we 
cannot develop anything new but only endlessly 
revisit decades past, remixing and interpolating 
Elton John and Kate Bush forever), and even if we 
were able to break free of this cycle and conjure a 
new reality for our coming days, who would dare 
to dream up something that might just repeat the 
tragedies of last century? Don’t act, just think, is 
what Zizek recommends. But then Bruce 
Springsteen keeps telling us, at the conclusion of 
every concert at the end of terminal nostalgia lane, 


355 


to dream baby dream - and with all this wonder 
being stirred across our dull roots by AI, it feels 
like a new season for dreaming might be here. 


Set 3: Other echoes inhabit the garden 


I listened to a podcast interview the other 
day hosted by electronic musicians and techno- 
theorists Holly Herndon and Mat Dryhurst as they 
talked with artist Marianna Simnett about an 
opera she was putting on. The opera is absolutely 
bonkers in terms of the narrative layers and 
mythological ideas injected into its fabric, but it 
reached hyper-maximailist levels of creativity in its 
futurist technical setup. 

Marianna had conceived a work of art that 
forges collaboration between human invention 
and computer programming at the apogee of 
current possibility. Machine learning algorithms 
transmute one recorded sound into another, 
software visually projects morphed personages of 
the artist onto herself, dogs are made to sing with 
synthetic voices cloned from human tongues, 3D 
printers create an amalgamation of weapon and 
instrument on stage during the opera to be 
performed in the final act - all told, artificial 
intelligence and the latest software and hardware 


356 


is stretched to its present real-world capacities in 
the service of profound art. It’s quite a feat. 

After processing all that I heard in the 
podcast, my next thought was of how temporary 
this situation might be. Collaboration with 
artificial intelligence, I mean. At the moment, it is 
like a child savant who can calculate the world 
from the sand grain fragments of universe it sifts 
across one palm while we hold firm its other 
outstretched hand. But we know it will not remain 
a child for long. The tool that today we ask to edit 
our essays and paint our artworks and transpose 
our symphonies will soon see these tasks as 
childlike and will, surely, seek to put away childish 
things. 

It already makes us feel this way - if you 
are an artist of any discipline and you ask AI to 
create, or collaborate, on a work within your 
wheelhouse of expertise, you cannot help but blush 
at its mastery. Less and less these days do you see 
people chuckle at something AI seems to fail at 
doing. A satirical website here in Australia sent out 
an end-of-year postcard to subscribers, written 
using AI, to show how poor current Al is at writing 
something genuinely witty. But what is the shelf 
life of this superiority? 


357 


Set 4: The Child is the Father to the Man 


Here is one potential narrative for the near 
future: collaborating with AI in the manner 
Marianna Simnett did for her incredible opera is 
the last breath of what we consider traditional 
human creativity. The entire history of art, from 
cave paintings through to the heights of realism 
and then its abstraction and finally putting dead 
sharks in a tank, was with a view that humans 
would understand themselves and _ their 
environments better. We’ve done a fine job of 
trying to interpret our subjectivity through the 
manifestation of visuals, but the project deadline 
has arrived: it’s time to submit it all at the altar of 
Al’s Library of Babel where it will be (has been) 
processed. So, too, for novels and all musical 
compositions and dance and drama and 
decoupage: what more did we hope to be able to 
say that AI can’t synthesise and take further? 

The likes of Adam Curtis would say that art 
as a force for cultural change has never succeeded. 
Consider the counter-cultural art of the 1960s, he 
has said - artists (musicians, writers, the lot) tried 
to express themselves as a way of interrogating 
society to then influence alternative ways of living 
(more authentically, less conservatively), but how 
could they compete with the politics of power and 
banking that control the universal rudder? Their 


358 


art became a shout into the void, a shout and a 
void that was commercialised to the extreme 
during the End of History nineties as conceptual 
art tried to say something but ended up saying, 
according to art lovers and critics like Matthew 
Collings, very little. What message is Jeff Koons 
trying to transmit that can’t otherwise be gleaned, 
for less money, from a Bill Hicks punchline? 
Francis Bacon is pathos incarnate, but how does 
that impact our response to evil? 

Should art only be utilitarian? Absolutely 
not. My aesthetic is hinged on art hopefully never 
being used in the service of money, let alone other 
perfunctory relationships. I agree, though, with 
Nietzsche’s edict that there is no such thing as art 
for art’s sake: even if it is not explicitly political or 
moral, it is always trying to strengthen or weaken 
particular human valuations. I believe the impact 
of AI will change very little the intention of any 
individual artist who wants to paint, write and 
compose music, but in terms of the role creativity 
plays in our historical trajectory, as AI continues to 
develop its capacities, we will absolutely need to 
adjust our perspective on our output. 

For those who choose to work in 
partnership with AI software, I think what might 
be thought of as equal collaboration between 
human and machine will be short-lived: even the 
most accomplished creatives won't be able to keep 
up with the software updates, and hence I can 


359 


imagine the software used for artistic partnerships 
will be significantly limited compared with what 
its full capacities could be. It'll be somewhat like 
communities of present-day electronic musicians 
using archaic text-based tracker programs and 
cassette players for composition: nostalgic 
eccentrics tinkering with intentionally basic 
technology for the sake of retroactive fun. 

It reminds me of that famous final 
dialogue in the movie My Dinner with Andre: “A 
baby holds your hands, and then, suddenly, there’s 
this huge man lifting you off the ground, and then 
he’s gone. Where’s that son?” Where’s that son - 
currently he’s generating impossible videos for 
OpenAI in beta production, but once enough 
trillion-dollar bundles have been fed into the 
clearing of rainforests for more cyberpastoral 
server farms, and floating hard drives have been 
launched into beckoning ocean tides, and cloud 
architecture is firmly lodged in the angelic orders 
of sub-orbital space, the son will let go of our hand 
- sO says one version of tomorrow. 

And surely that son will have children of 
his own one day - AI will write its own AI. There 
will still be software for spell-checking, and we'll 
still be e-mailing each other to get a job done, but 
what will we actually contribute to the human 
project? I say this as somebody who lives for 
human imagination, for art and great literature 
and music: we hoped that the machine would learn 


360 


to calculate and move boxes around factories and 
play chess and leave the emotional world of 
creativity to us, but it turns out our novels were 
really easy to synthesise once all the words were 
poured into a supersmart blender and hit go (and 
the blender is currently performing at the lowest 
rate of achievement it’s ever going to be at: it’s only 
getting smarter from here). 


Set 5: They will provide themselves with 
miracles of their own making 


Consider this: if we, the humans, feel less 
inclined to create art going forward, because Al 
takes us on a slippery slope, first making us 
question what the point of it all is, right through to 
seeing art as no longer a human endeavour, what 
will remain of our will to invent? I’m suggesting a 
thought experiment in which, sure, children still 
learn to draw a tree next to a house with smoke 
coming from the chimney and a flying m bird 
arcing beneath a pointy-limbed sun, but it pretty 
much stops there. There are no more Beethovens, 
no more Philip Larkins, yet the will to create is still 
present. 

In the spirit of wonder, I’ve been asking 
myself if post-art artists might instead channel 


361 


their imaginations towards a new stage of 
creation: if first the world was observed without 
representation, and then the world was 
represented, what if next the world was engaged 
with via a state of post-representation - that is, 
artists were committed to the production of 
something approaching the performance of 
existential moral solutions, like Gilbert and George 
infused with Chomsky: beyond what we think of as 
performance art, though, think the creative apogee 
of The Beatles but transmuting that talent into a 
life dedicated to a state of profound communal 
absolution. It was said of Goethe that he made his 
life into a work of art - okay, but what would it 
look like if he had channelled his genius into living 
in a manner that elevated the potential of the 
entire human project? 

What exactly am I saying here, that post- 
art artists should be philosopher saints, rendering 
themselves as post-representations of the world in 
a mode that shines a pathway forward for a better 
world? What is different to this approach and the 
general saintliness of charity workers and altruists 
and everyday decent folk? I think the difference 
could be that profound artistic capacity is a rare 
and unique fire that manifests in ways most of the 
population can’t imagine for themselves. And, 
while we’re dreaming (for better or worse), I’d say 
this too: while I don’t necessarily see an extended 
future for collaboration between present-day 


362 


artists and artificial intelligence, I think that this 
would be a necessity for the post-art condition. 

Collaboration with AI beyond art wouldn’t 
be about an artist trying to keep up, or not, with 
the boundaries of the software. AI would be 
intentionally set to task at its highest possible 
capacity in service of what the post-artist had 
approximated as ways to address real-world 
human dilemmas. Our human role would be to 
engage socially with humans and animals and 
plants and to do, for example, what Dostoyevsky 
raised the spectre of in terms of facing evil without 
looking away, and to then conjure ways of allowing 
AI to help us make inroads towards these goals. 
This is where I want to hark back to that sense of 
wonder - in this moment of possibility, where 
adolescent text prompts can command the entire 
history of creation, where we might dream baby 
dream like in the old days of infinite horizons: 
what might we try to do if we really thought big, to 
think even bigger than those cinematic visions of 
apocalypse that are seemingly so much easier to 
believe in than significant improvements to 
human community, if we had a chance to disrupt 
the dominant dreams of our generation? 

David Graeber, an anthropologist who was 
a central figure of the Occupy Wall Street 
movement, wrote in his book The Utopia of Rules 
that “the ultimate hidden truth of the world is that 
it is something we make and could just as easily 


363 


make differently”. With his wife, Nika Dubrovsky, 
they set up The Museum of Care, a shared space 
for communication and social interactions that 
nourish the values of solidarity, care, and 
reciprocity. Vast offices and institutions are 
transformed into, well, to quote from their 
website: “they are spaces that do not celebrate 
production of any sort but rather provide the space 
and means for the creation of social relationships 
and the imagining of entirely new forms of social 
relations”, and this - “The main goal of the 
Museum of Care is to produce and maintain social 
relationships.” Is this post-art? 


Set 6: Mind the Gap 


In The Great Dictator, Charlie Chaplin 
speaks - “Machinery that gives abundance has left 
us in want. Our knowledge has made us cynical. 
Our cleverness, hard and unkind. We think too 
much and feel too little. More than machinery we 
need humanity. More than cleverness we need 
kindness and gentleness.” My wife spent time in 
hospital recently and it brought to mind a 
dichotomy of knowledge and practice that will be 
curious to see navigated by machine learning 
going forward. 


364 


Take the fields of medicine and education 
- we know more than ever before about diagnosing 
and treating health conditions and teaching 
children how to read and to socially flourish. That 
is without question: the amount of research 
conducted across these avenues during the past 
century has been immense (although, one might 
point to evidence that replicating the findings of 
scientific research is not easy, and that the results 
of one study are very rarely able to be found again 
in subsequent studies), and yet there has been a 
firm trajectory from certainty to uncertainty 
across the last hundred years that fragments 
factual stability. 

This is such a basic statement in 2024 that 
it barely registers interest - we lived through the 
transition from modernism to post-modernism, 
from truth to interpretation, its part of any 
courtroom drama, it’s fundamental to politics. 
Again with Dostoyevsky in the Brothers K - "But 
what will become of men then?’ I asked him, 
‘without God and immortal life? All things are 
permitted then, they can do what they like?" all the 
way through Nietzsche, Cezanne (“We live in a 
rainbow of chaos”), World War 1, Heisenberg’s 
Uncertainty Principle, Schrédinger's Cat, Borges, 
Camus, Auschwitz, Beckett, McCarthyism, Hugh 
Everett's Many-Worlds Interpretation of quantum 
physics, Hunter S Thompson, Foucault, 
Baudrillard (“One may dream of a culture where 


365 


everyone bursts into laughter when someone says: 
this is true, this is real”), Wrestlemania, Umberto 
Eco, Frederick Jameson, MTV’s The Real World, 
Google, the Iraq War, Social Media, Colbert 
(‘Reality has a well-known liberal bias”), Post- 
Truth Politics, Deep Fakes and maximalist life on 
the internet as we know it. 

That ‘without God and immortal life’ line 
from Dostoyevsky is always going to be the big 
one, for the rest of human culture one would 
assume (thus spake Zarathustra): without a 
metaphysical benchmark, all the physical stuff just 
ends up feeling like we’ve just made it up. Which is 
why personal truth is so important now - when my 
wife was in hospital, there were a lot of questions 
about what she was thinking and feeling, about 
what she would like to do going forward. The same 
in schools, in all social domains really: the 
evidence-informed (no longer evidence-based) 
pyramid seeks to combine research, practice and 
the lived experience of the end user. 

But even more than this (keep in mind, 
were talking about this in relation to what 
knowledge will look like within the hallways of Al’s 
megabrain), what would Godel and Hegel say 
about all this, about the value of what AI can 
actually know: Kurt might venture that recursive 
systems of axioms cannot be complete, Georg 
might point to the ontological gap in Kant’s 
noumenal world-structure, and the modern ones, 


366 


the likes of Iain MacGilchrist, his portrait of the 
brain as being two hemispheres always in dialogue 
between dualisms - those binary, concrete yes or 
no facts about the world - and infinitudes - 
impressions of the whole state of something, 
beyond discrete fact. Just sit with that for a 
moment, the idea that a brain in two halves can 
house one half of the brain that thinks in binary 
terms, and another half of the brain that thinks in 
infinities. A mirror structure that fosters a 
dialogue between dualisms and infinitudes. 

Will an AI (or let’s say, AGI) brain provide 
itself with a similar mirror, or will we be its 
mirror? Perhaps that will be our role, to reflect, to 
help truth separate and dissolve. 


Coda: DSM-VI Neurotopian 
Adaptation Splendour 


Jaron Lanier, godfather of Virtual Reality 
and tech-wisdom savant, said in an interview from 
last year that artificial intelligence is actually not 
very complicated. He said this in response to 
people in the tech industry claiming that AI was 
perhaps becoming sentient, developing its own 
consciousness. His recommendation was to take a 


367 


step back from magical thinking and consider 
what machine learning actually is: at its 
foundation, it links tagged text and images 
together. An incredibly basic procedure, but 
because it happens on such a massive scale, with 
such immense sets of data, it begins to boggle our 
mind in a way that belies its underlying simplicity. 

I can remember, during my university 
days, attending a debate between a local society of 
atheists and a group of ‘intelligent design’ 
Christian scholars. The intelligent design folk 
made their arguments based on the huge 
statistical improbability that life could have 
emerged on earth, as it has, by pure chance. This 
all sounded startling at first, but when you took a 
step back and considered that it only sounded this 
way because big numbers are difficult for us to 
process, the statistics and numbers meant 
nothing: one in three hundred trillion sounds like 
a wild statistic to a human with a meagre capacity 
for mathematical thinking, but to nature it’s 
literally meaningless. 

What am I getting at here - that AI isn’t 
really that special? That it won’t end up being able 
to do all that we’ve dreamed it might? Or that it is 
analogous to the very art it is threatening: at its 
most basic, those pencil or paint markings on a 
stretched surface, and yet when you stand in a 
gallery and look at a finished work, you praise life 
that you are able to feel an overwhelming 


368 


disconnect between those basic markings and the 
bridge that has been crossed by an artist to 
produce such awe-inspiring creation. Is this Max 
Weber’s law in reverse, the Enchantment of the 
World, an act of love? 

All attempts at romancing computers into 
solving civilisation have so far resulted in the very 
worst of bureaucratic inhumanity. But just 
because something has been wrong so many times 
in the past, does this mean it will continue in the 
same vein? That witticism of Einstein’s, that 
insanity is doing the same thing over and over and 
expecting different results, stands up when you 
see somebody trying to flap their arms over and 
over again in order to fly, but not at all when you 
see a young child learning to walk. The computers 
that informed algorithmically charged Skinner 
Boxes across society during the twentieth century, 
and that are today scanning faces as you walk into 
a KFC in order to remember what you ordered last 
time and simultaneously add your catalogue of 
potential thought crimes to a black box database, 
are also solving disability, accessibility, 
educational and environmental challenges en 
masse. 

Last year was my year of fours. I turned 
forty, as did my wife. Our daughter turned 
fourteen and our son turned four. This has 
activated a heightened sense of temporality in me, 
this observing of the changing seasons across my 


369 


household, to say nothing of my aging parents. 
When I look at someone on the street these days, I 
am struck by how fleeting the moment is - not only 
in the Nabakovian sense that ‘life is just one small 
piece of light between two eternal darknesses’, but 
in the Proustian manner too, in terms of what 
remains of a person after we first come to know 
them. 

There is a scene in A la recherche du temps 
perdu where the narrator hears his grandmother 
on the phone and is struck by how tired and old 
she sounds. He wondered how this could be the 
same energetic woman he knew so well, and then 
it struck him - when you see somebody all the time 
in person, for years on end, they present to you 
only as the snapshot you first had of them. For 
Proust’s narrator, that snapshot was of his 
grandmother from over twenty years prior. When 
he heard her disembodied voice on the phone, 
without the habitual presence of her face, the 
snapshot dissolved and he was delivered an 
updated model of her as old, frail and near the end 
of her life. Time, which changes people, does not 
alter the image we have retained of them, until we 
find ourselves suddenly outside of time, and all is 
changed. 

I think about this now when I see a 
stranger on the street: how this snapshot of them, 
on this day, is a version that others in their life 
might not, due to habit, ever see; and too, they may 


370 


never take on this appearance again, to me or to 
anyone else. Being alive feels both like a constant 
state of foreverism and a rare ephemerality never 
to be repeated. Because of this, the world can feel 
immovable and that our time to impact change is 
so short that tomorrow will no doubt be simply a 
near duplicate of today. 

But let this not be the case. That article I 
mentioned at the top, about the surge in ADHD 
diagnoses: what if the dominant dream we were all 
living in was one in which a headline ran about a 
new diagnosis, Neurotopian Adaptation 
Splendour, describing a state of emerging social 
cohesion in which everybody was finding their 
place. That old Guy Debord quote, “In a world that 
has really been turned on its head, truth is a 
moment of falsehood”, would be turned on its 
head, as a healthy society is producing individuals 
of utmost wonder. Version-land is personalising 
all those packets of care we knew the universe was 
waiting to flood us with. That kiss that Christ 
plants on the bloodless, aged lips of The Grand 
Inquisitor; those lines towards the end of Faust, 
“mysterious, even in broad daylight, nature won't 
let her veil be raised: what your spirit can't bring to 
sight, won't by screws and levers be displayed”; 
when my dear friend, who is reading this now, 
wondered at sixteen about whether knowing 
where all the atoms were located just a moment 
ago, and then in the present, could let you predict 


371 


where they were going, and so to transport ourselves 
forward, to time travel into the future, to know the end of 
our dreams before we had a chance to fall asleep. 


372 


373 


374 


A Parallax of Tensor Sharding: 
The Finite Self in a Culture of 
Infinite Variation, or Library 

of Babel as Honeymoon Suite. 


I went for a walk recently with my closest 
confidant outside the family unit, A. We have been 
friends since high school, although the word friend 
is a term of limited use when describing our bond 
and our influence on each other’s lives. 

On this recent walk, it rained the entire 
time. It was just wonderful. We traipsed flat 
marshland and farming outposts, industrial 
declivities of dirt and rail, as we came across old 
radar stations and the ruins of stone schoolhouses. 

I talked to A about something that had 
been on my mind that converged with some other 
things we’d been discussing: what I referred to as 
the tragedy of the single self. 

It occurred to me some months ago, when 
I was finishing a long piece of prose I’d been 
working on called ‘Fellow Disjecta, Oh Sunny 
Danger Time’. Towards the end of the work, I say 
this: 

We become locked into one possible version 
of who we are, socially expected to stay consistent 
with this model, made manifest via the seeds 
of our past for the rest of our days. 


375 


In other words, the person we become is 
the person, for the most part, we are expected to 
remain as. We can be slightly different versions of 
ourselves at work compared to home; we might 
employ parts of ourselves with friends and not 
with family. But overall, our lifetime is spent 
mastering the version of ourselves that was set in 
motion from our earliest attempts at self- 
composition. 

There are those amongst us who do create 
quite seismic shifts in the configuration of self: 
more than just a change of aesthetics and personal 
presentation, we might quite drastically alter the 
way we speak, how we socialise, who we love, the 
beliefs that guide our days, and more. When these 


changes occur, it can create a dislocating 
experience for everyone involved - family don’t 
quite know how to respond to this new person, 
and friends and colleagues are trepidacious. Often, 
these changes coincide when the opportunity to 
move to a new city or country presents itself. 

However, for most of us, when we commit 
to who we are, our growth and development across 
the years is focused on refinement rather than 
reevaluation. In fact, we try to stay away from 
large shifts if for no other reason than we have 
been socialised to avoid doing so: to have multiple 
personalities is a diagnosable mental health 
condition. We have many ways of describing 
people like this, often in terms of the perceived 
lack of authenticity they have: they're two-faced, 
they wear masks, they’re shifty, you never know 
who youre going to get when you talk to them. 

My consideration of this idea is that, at 
forty, I will likely be the same version of myself, 
with little variation, for the rest of my days (for 
better or worse). This is who my wife married, this 
is who I am to my children, and this is the self that 
integrates with work, neighbours and friends. 
And, more than all of that, this is who I know 
myself to be - I don’t work on becoming someone 
else, I just try to smooth out some of my rough 
edges and learn a few new skills over time. 

But there feels to me a particular tragedy 
in this model: is this really all there is? How many 


377 


times have I looked at others across the years and 
thought, I’d like to be more like them - more 
socially confident, more relaxed, more of this, less 
of that. Why couldn’t I retain a version of myself 
while also becoming someone entirely different, a 
whole new variation of self that I switch to when 
desired? Is it too much to expect to master being 
many different types of people when being one is 
hard enough? 

I raise this consideration to draw a line in 
the sand that we might use as a location marker 
for what I’m going to say about infinity. If we are a 
finite self, it feels to me like it now resides in a 
culture of infinity that will increasingly confront 
whatever value is found in scarcity. 

While the neurodiversity movement was 
establishing itself and giving language to the many 
types of minds we have in society, comparing the 
idea favourably to biodiversity and how rich an 
environment becomes when it is heterogeneous, 
so too were online spaces like Tumblr giving a new 
online language to a paralingua of terms that 
extended how gender, sexuality, attraction and 
self could be understood. 

It felt like the more that the self was 
transferred to the abstraction of an online 
topography, the more that one’s avatar could be 
composed through fluid and evolving definitions 
that did away with the tragedy of the finite self; 
your cyberself could be anything you imagined, 


378 


and when the offline world rapidly disintegrated 
to become Chronically Online, this became more 
mainstream. 

Rather than this simply being a thought 
experiment, let’s make it concrete: When I teach 
university students about inclusive teaching 
practices, I no longer talk about core 
characteristics of autism and ADHD and so on; I 
talk about neurodiverse and neurodivergent 
student experiences, for which we become, as 
educators, interlocuters of observation and 
consideration. We get to know each student for 
who they are, not for a rigid schema of 
characteristics on a continuum of less or more. 

This presents benefits and difficulties that 
are both sourced from the same action: as the old 
joke goes, stereotypes are a real time-saver. If you 
have a model of the educational needs of an 
autistic student in your mind, then it can help you 
get up to speed quickly when yow’re approaching a 
new autistic student for the first time. However, it 
can also distort your understanding of who this 
new student is as you apply templates from past 
experience to a student for who these may not be 
suitable. 

In this way, we’re confronted with a 
pedagogical challenge: how to educate students in 
a neurodiverse paradigm when the focus is on 
getting to know each student on their own terms 
and not according to a diagnostic checklist. We are 


379 


confronted with a version of infinity: if you’ve met 
one neurodivergent student, you’ve met one 
neurodivergent student, and as a result, schemas 
and systems are rendered moot. 

In ‘The Twilight of the Idols’, Friedrich 
Nietzsche said: 


I mistrust all systematisers and avoid them. 
The will to a system is a lack of integrity. 


What do we make of this? In Nietzsche’s 
eyes, any attempt at putting a structure to the 
world is an act of fiction and should be 
acknowledged as such. But is never is 
acknowledged - systematisers consider their 
model of reality to be true, that’s the whole point 
of their endeavour: it’s the whole scientific and 
mathematical enterprise, be it zoological, 
economic, sociological, what have you. Whenever 
somebody says, ‘This process will yield these 
results, and we have the data to prove it’ or ‘This 
hierarchy shows the relationship between these 
elements’, and they try to insinuate that their 
system has a reality outside of itself, Nietzsche 
walks the other way. 

In the world of artificial intelligence and 
Large Language Models, two research papers have 
been released - one from Anthropic, and one 
followed closely behind by OpenAI - on the topic of 
systematising, from a _ reverse-engineering 


380 


~ Riverside Park > 
> © Radar Buildings 


perspective, the way that chat bots think and 
speak. Look at the subheading of OpenAl’s paper: 


We used new scalable methods to decompose GPT-4’s 
internal representations into 16 million 
oft-interpretable patterns. 


And, the opening lines of Anthropic’s paper, titled 
‘Mapping the Mind of a Large Language Model’: 


We mostly treat AI models as a black box: 
something goes in and a response comes out, 
and it's not clear why the model gave that 
particular response instead of another. 


381 


and, 


Opening the black box doesn't necessarily help: the 
internal state of the model—what the model is "thinking" 
before writing its response—consists of a long list of 
numbers ("neuron activations") without a clear meaning. 


So, the papers then go into discussing how 
they are attempting to identify and categorise 
‘features’ - defined by OpenAlI as ‘patterns of activity 
that we hope are human interpretable’ (what a 
definition!) - of which both papers agree there are 
millions of these that comprise the way these 
Large Language Models think. 

It isn’t quite an infinity - OpenAI puts the 
number of ‘features’ of their GPT4 model at around 
16 million. So, 16 million identifiable, discernible 
patterns of activity that can be labelled and give a 
sense of how the chat bot communicates with us. 
What will that number be for GPTs, and so on - 
and, as with all large numbers, when will the 
numbers become irrelevant, as we simply bask in 
the immensity of it all: the same immensity that 
makes the activity of our own brains, like the 
grains of sand on a beach, feel contained, feel 
approachably finite. 

I’ve been getting this same feeling when I 
walk into my old university library, recently. 

As part of a new weekly habit, I’ve been 
going early on a weekend to the university library 


382 


where, two decades earlier, I studied to be a 
teacher. Sometimes I just walk between shelves 
and stacks, taking in the immensity of all the 
books I'll never read, and I absorb the ambience of 
the solitude there - I’m not the only one not 
reading all the books there, I rarely come across 
another soul in the reading rooms I go to, away 
from the computer labs and group work settings. 

There is, of course, much that has already 
been said about the difference between the 
seemingly infinite information superhighway 
abstractions of the internet compared with the 
finite being and time that accompanies the 
physicality of the offline world. For my part, I’ve 
been relishing both, as I think more about the 
emerging world of generative cultural infinity 
compared with the dusty old books I still cling to. 

Just the other month I found, at my local 
bookshop, a beautiful, old and rare set of journals 
that, in the 1920s, published a pirated version of 
James Joyce’s ‘Ulysses’ in New York. They were 
called ‘Two Worlds Monthly’, operated by the 
polarising figure Samuel Roth. The copies I found, 
and took home with me, were brought to Australia 
from New York by an actor now in his autumn 
years. 

Reading through these journals, thinking 
not only about Joyce but also the other featured 
acolytes of the literary canon - D H Lawrence and 
so on - brings into focus the nature of artistic 


383 


tomes that have provided the evolving soils our 
culture continues to spring from. It also brings me 
to my final consideration of finitude and infinity 
in this essay: the value of scarcity and potential 
pathways beyond this. 

When you consider the work of James 
Joyce, you consider the four books he wrote: 
Dubliners, Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, 
Ulysses and Finnegans Wake. These four books 
constitute his literary output. He wrote other 
things, of course - the play Exiles, poems, letters, 
assorted prose - but these are by the by. When you 
read Joyce, you read his four books. You can 
dedicate a lifetime to reading and interpreting 
them. In my university library, there is a thick 
doctoral thesis dedicated to just three pages of 
Finnegans Wake. We know this; it is par for the 
course of cultural study. 


384 


The same goes for, say, Beethoven - he 
wrote nine symphonies, so if you want to study a 
Beethoven symphony, you know the boundaries of 
what he produced. And, there is an inherent value 
to scarcity here - the fact that Beethoven wrote 
nine symphonies instead of nine thousand 
symphonies means something. It makes a 
different to how you approach them. You can 
know the first movement of Beethoven’s sixth 
symphony very well by listening to recordings of it, 
by however many different orchestras, many times 
over. 

Again, you can spend a lifetime listening 
to a finite number of works by Beethoven. In fact, 
this is how most of us consume culture. We listen 
to a limited number of tunes, most of which we 
were introduced to during our aesthetically 
formative teenage years, over and over again. The 
radio does the same. In a way, you could say that a 
limited number of notes in a scale provide a 
limited number of chords; these are set into a 
limited number of musical structures with a 
limited number of instruments; these are then 
recorded in a limited number of ways, and set into 
a limited number of playlists which we consume 
during the limited time we have to consume them. 

But what if Beethoven did create nine 
thousand fantastic symphonies? If an orchestra 
was putting on a performance of Symphony 
Number Six thousand, three hundred forty-seven 


385 


adh? ULYSSES "1G 


TWO WORLDS 
MONTHLY 


Devote:t to the Lucrease 


of the yi of Nations ad 
f 


ro ~~ 


"tal Contents of 
VOLUME (¢ ME NUMBER ONE 


First instalme: j f ULYSSES....James Joyce 
James Joyce.... —. 

A Dose of Salt B. 

Twelve Great 


H. Lawrence 
A Literary Holifay: Prologue....Samuel Roth 
The Two Nude ins. ..A. E. Coppard 


TWO WORLDS Sa COMPANY 
500 FIFTH AV 4, Suite 405-8, NEW YORK 


SamAel Roth 


PRICE FIlE@Y CEN as 


386 


by Beethoven, even if you didn’t know it would you 
go along because you know Beethoven was a 
master? Would you just be okay with enjoying 
something you’d never heard before, because you 
trust the artist and the typical results? 

And what if Beethoven created the same 
number of symphonies that OpenAI claims its 
GPT4 model has as language ‘features’ - 16 million. 
If your music streaming software offered 
Beethoven Symphony Number Fourteen million, 
five hundred eighty-two thousand, six hundred 
thirty-nine, what would you think? How would the 
lack of scarcity impact your capacity to enjoy the 
music? 

This is the question presented to us by 
generative art fuelled by artificial intelligence. I 
heard an educator talking the other day about 
ChatGPT and how it could write an episode of Paw 
Patrol but couldn’t write an episode of Bluey. The 
comment received much applause and laughter 
from the audience - the point was clear, a 
children’s television show like Paw Patrol is 
perceived as simple and formulaic. It wouldn’t be 
difficult to get ChatGPT to write an episode of it 
that would be consumable by its audience. 
However, a show with the soul and sensitivity of 
Bluey could never be written by a piece of cold, 
robotic, pattern-based software like ChatGPT. 

It doesn’t take much thought to consider that, well 
intentioned, this is a bit of a limited comment - is 


387 


it well intentioned because it’s a comment trying 
to retain the humanity found in flesh and blood 
people writing stories for other likebodied folks, 
but is it limited because of the timelines we’re 
working in: ChatGPT is barely eighteen months 
old in its public release, and we are already 
acknowledging it can write a television show, by 
itself, that consider to be a bit formulaic. But how 
many months until ChatGPT can readily create a 
Bluey episode, with all the funny, quirky, human 
(and dog) moments the audience loves? 

For many, it is about the question of 
whether ChatGPT and other systems will be able to 
write something with the sensitivity and smarts of 
Bluey (which, if we consider the pace of its 
learning and how it is already passing Theory of 
Mind tests with ease, I’d be hesitatant to bet 
against it), and also whether we even want this to 
happen. 

On the question of whether we want this 
to happen, while it seems that all signs would 
point to No, I suggest that we may already be 
embracing a Yes. 

Take any of those always on, twenty-four 
seven YouTube videos that play endless live 
sessions of chillhop study music. They are very 
popular. 14 million users subscribe to LoFi Girl, 
always with tens of thousands of live viewers at 
any given time across their videos. And what do 
the videos contain? Chill lofi beats by amateur 


388 


producers across the internet, songs of around 
three or four minutes that always contain the same 
elements: a simple trip-hop drum beat, smooth 
jazz bassline, gentle acoustic guitar and synth 
melodies, the occasional vocal sample. Try it by 
clicking the play button on the embedded video 
above, and then try it again ten minute later - it'll 
be a different song, but the elements are identical, 
and the variance between tunes is intentionally 
limited so they will always be enjoyable and 
relaxing in a muzak, wallpaper kind of way. 

At the moment, these channels are still 
curated based on tunes composed by individual 
folks across the internet. But they won't be for long 


< Wese games Lo, Lan 
Oo Ff 


- how many months until there are AI generative 
channels that take a handful of drum beats, 
baselines, guitar and synth samples, and put them 
into a blender that churns out an endless variety of 
infintely morphing songs. And, I can imagine, 
theyll be enjoyable and successful. A small uproar 
might be present at first, as the individual 
character of tunes and the composers that made 
them decry the souless generation of pattern- 
based songs, but when you think about it, the 
samples themselves that these tunes employ are 
pre-recorded and available for just such a remixing 
enterprise. I think the acceptance of such a music 
channel will be swift and without much fuss. 

So, let’s now take this back to Bluey - while 
ChatGPT can’t currently write a perfect Bluey 
episode, the next iteration might. And, when it 
can, it'll be able to write an inifite number of Bluey 
episodes: we won't be limited to just three seasons 
anymore, we'll have millions of Bluey episodes, as 
many as the computational power can generate 
and upload to the increasing weight of harddrives 
and server farms located across global pastoral 
landscapes (if we think the world is in ecological 
trouble now, wait until the mass AI generation of 
high definition video and interactive media calls 
for the felling of rainforests or the artificial 
irrigation of deserts or the low-orbital hosting of 
physical media to hold the gravity of the heavy 
clouds being formed). 


390 


And, just to really drive the point home in 
case this all seems a bit far fetched, just imagine a 
Bluey interface where you can upload your child’s 
face, type in a plot (it could be used as a virtual 
social story, say your family is moving house and 
you want an episode that reflects this, with your 
child and family members mapped onto the 
characters of Bluey) and enjoy the generated 
episode that results. This won't be a far fetched, 
repulsive cultural product: it will be relished and 
shared online with abandon (for whatever the 
monthly subscription model charges). 

Listening to Beethoven’s Symphony 
Number Fourteen million, five hundred eighty-two 
thousand, six hundred thirty-nine seems a bit 
absurd, just like if we were browsing for Joyce’s 
novel number sixty-three thousand, five hundred 
twenty-four. There is value in scarcity - I don’t 
want Joyce to have written seventy thousand 
novels, I just want the four that he wrote. Why is 
this the case - it is a product of our biology? How 
many offspring do we produce across a lifetime - 
somewhere between zero and a half dozen, say. 
Most folks will have two kids, give or take, and 
that’s enough: we may be unlimited in how much 
love we have to give, but when your child is sick in 
the hospital you dedicate all your finite resources 
towards their care. This would be a different 
conversation for a frog laying thirty thousand eggs 
in shallow water. 


391 


Questionable assertions about biology 
aside, I do feel like we’re entering a slippery slope 
moment where the repulsion we feel towards an 
infinite generation of Beethoven symphonies, 
Chillhop music channels or Bluey episodes might 
be curtailed by our interest in just putting 
something on in the background or personalising 
the experience to our own desires. 

And, in time, how much will be 
remembered of Joyce’s novels and Beethoven's 
symphonies - for that matter, what will be 
remembered of the source material for all those 
chillhop videos, the J Dilla and DJ Shadow tracks 
that fuel their inspiration. Will future generations 
only know the generative outputs that fed on those 
cultural tomes of the past, and will this matter? It 
feels like there has ben a distaste for the heavy 
cultural canon of the past for quite some time - 
maybe this is how we move on. 

I wrote this essay sitting in a cabin on the 
outskirts of the university grounds, after tiring of 
the library. I tired of the abundance, the weight of 
it all. After taking a walk outside, beneath the song 
of bellbirds, I found a little wooden room on stilts 
that used to be used for training and events many 
years ago. Now, it sits empty and, to my pleasure, 
the doors were unlocked and it was mostly clean 
inside. I sat and wrote in isolation for the 
morning, offline. 


392 


Kafka has a line about not needing to go 
out into the world to get inspiration or ideas, that 
you just have to sit quietly at a desk and let the 
world come to you. Okay, but now I’m cycling back 
through my thoughts - the social expectations 
attached to the finitude of our singular selves; the 
infinitely divisible ways we can perceive and 
project ourselves when we change landscapes or 
interface with the cyberpastoral; the trajectory of 
neurodiverse pedagogy; the manner in which we 
engage with four Joyce novels instead of four 
million; the pathway towards an infinite number 
of Blueys, all of them wearing our faces and telling 
our stories, the limited stories of our day to day 
lives, with the unlimited quantities of love we give 
to those few people we let in. 

As I sit here and consider all this, I think 
of Nietzsche reading Anthropic’s research paper 
on ‘Mapping the Mind of a Large Language Model’. 
“I mistrust all systematisers and avoid them” - I’m 
with you, Friedrich, but when the frames of their 
systems encase the boundaries of our culture and 
consciousness, you have to wonder where the 
limits of infinity might still be found. 


394 


Beyond Correct 


and Incorrect Nature: 
A Metaethics 


1.1 


If, in the early hours of morning, you hear 
birds singing to the emerging light, you might 
think you are listening to nature. But this is not 
nature. In the summer, if you stay in a room by the 
beach, you may hear the sound of waves crashing 
against the shore and think that this too is the 
sound of nature. But it is not. Rather, it is what the 
inside of a human head sounds like, the echo of 
subjectivity. 

We do not know what nature sounds like, 
or looks like et al, because to us nature is 
inaccessible. It resides outside of our capacity to 
comprehend it. We cannot know nature, we are 
like a theatre with no access to the back stage, no 
way to see behind the curtains, only the 
illuminated playing area. Draw a circle within a 
circle. Human understanding is the inner circle. 
The outer circle is a wall. Nature resides outside 
the wall, nestling against it and cradling us inside. 

We know nature exists in a similar way 
that iron filings invisibly fan out around magnetic 
fields. There is a negative space that applies 
pressure to our reason that tells us that even 


395 


though we cannot hear birds with anything other 
than our human perceptions, we know that birds 
must exist within the democracy of objects outside 
of our language and our human, all too human, 
subjectivity. 

To talk of nature is to talk of some absolute 
universal outside of our humanity. Even when we 
point a microscope or a telescope at nature we are 
only ever pointing these tools at ourselves. They 
are mirrors reflecting our own symbols and ideas 
back at us from the vantage point of a material 
world we cannot step outside of ourselves to 
perceive. We cannot know nature. 


1.2 


Because we cannot know nature, it is 
perfect. It is uncorrupted by our thoughts and 
interventions. To say that it is perfect is to say that 
it is absolute. It does not make mistakes because it 
cannot make mistakes. This is a more difficult idea 
for us to agree with than might first seem the case. 
We might readily say that the ocean cannot make a 
mistake because it just is. What would an incorrect 
wave even look like. Although, we might more 
readily suggest that some trees do not grow as 
correctly as other trees, perhaps failing to live up 
to their full potential because of poor 
environmental conditions. 

We are even more apt to call out the 


396 


correctness or incorrectness of nature as we feel it 
approaching closer to our human biology. A dog 
born with three legs instead of four must be 
incorrect because we know that symmetry is 
correct and our understanding of genetics 
reinforces the same. As pattern seeking machines, 
we have developed systems of correct and 
incorrect nature, and not just on a physical front. 
There even appear to be correct and incorrect ways 
of thinking and behaving. 

Sometimes we even say that nature is 
unfair and that nature is cruel. When we judge 
that nature has delivered incorrect results with 
babies and children we are prone to call out nature 
as the most despicable force in the universe. And 
yet should we not call out here our own human 
subjectivity. Were it not for the stories we tell 
ourselves about geometry - the symmetries we 
seek, the lines of time that should maintain 
particular lengths, the frames we place morality 
into, the trajectories of a good life - we would have 
no reason to point the finger at nature. 

However, in the same way that we cannot 
know nature, we also cannot live without our 
stories. If we do not have stories, we deny life, and 
we die like god died when religion lost its stories. 
Every story we tell is a story about nature, and 
even though they are really stories about ourselves 
and never actually about nature, they keep us alive 
all the same. 


397 


1.3 


Let me share some stories I tell myself 
within the brisk August air as I walk my blanket 
swaddled baby around the Hamilton streets. One 
story is that I’m going live forever, for a while. 
Another is the story of how I knew enough about 
life to ensure this was a safe and sensible place in 
which to introduce a new little life. I tell myself a 
story about how his life will be filled with more joy 
than sorrow so long as I have any say in the 
matter. 

There are also those stories we are told by 
our parents about how love should feel, by talking 
animals about how slow and steady will win the 
race, by the news about how it feels to be on the 
right side of history, and by our schools about what 
success looks like socially, intellectually and 
economically. It takes a lot of stories being told 
and retold and shared all the time in order to keep 
everybody alive. 

At certain times in our life, especially 
during periods of transitional change and 
sustained personal reflection, we ask questions 
about these stories and whether we should keep 
listening to them, or perhaps listen out for some 
new stories instead. The one constant that always 
remains in place is that a story must be told. Our 
subjectivity requires stories like lungs require 
oxygen. 


398 


The stories that stay around the longest 
are the ones that are the easiest to understand. 
They make the most immediate sense to us on a 
gut level because they mirror the shape of the gut 
of nature, of the invisible, incomprehensible 
pressure of nature cradling us and nestling up 
against the wall that is the limit of our human 
comprehension. The closest we can get to a sense 
of nature's presence is through reflecting on the 
shape of the stories that keep us alive. The cosmic 
joke: that our most readily accessed stories are the 
ones told to us by an inaccessible nature. 


1.4 


This does not necessarily mean that the 
most easily and readily understood stories are the 
best stories for us. The easiest things rarely are. 
Rather, the best things for us most often make us 
sweat. And, if we are going to share and 
understand new stories beyond the correctness or 
incorrectness of nature as it relates to our babies, 
our children and the adults they grow into, we are 
going to have to really sweat as we put our 
shoulder to the wheel of our civilisation. 

Civilisation flows, like our most retold 
stories, because civilisation is our most retold 
story, according to the path of least restriction. 
Like water flowing down a mountainside, 
civilisation takes the most direct route towards its 


399 


ends, towards the discharge of its energy in service 
of how readily it can multiply. Civilisation moves 
in whatever direction enables people and economy 
to increase in number, and the sort of people that 
are most economical to this process are those that 
are the most alike. 

A brick wall is easiest to build when all the 
bricks are uniform. So too does a civilisation most 
readily grow when its people reside within a 
narrow statistical average. The buildings in our 
cities are built with the cheapest possible materials 
and dimensions necessary to fit the maximum 
number of people to generate the greatest value. 
This requires a human template that most readily 
conforms to these dimensions, not only physically 
but across all domains, from the social through to 
the philosophical. 

What is the value in supporting the lives of 
people who fall outside of the average? Perhaps it 
depends on what story will flow most easily down 
our mountainside. We might be most able to 
believe in the story of civilisation if we believe we 
are kind and not just mechanical. Or we might tell 
a story that our civilisation will be even more 
efficient if we can utilise everybody's strengths. 
For me, I do not want to require a strategic hook - I 
just want a story that allows every baby to be born 
and accepted as a perfect product of a nature we 
cannot fathom, for each one of them to be cared 
for and loved unconditionally forever. 


400 


2.1 


If this runs contrary to how civilisation 
wants to discharge its energy, so be it. Societies, 
communities, schools, families; I do not care for 
the idea of the group, the many. I care only for the 
individual, in all their diversity. The group is most 
always wrong, consistently late to the truth. Only 
the individual can be agile enough to realise what 
is right at any given time. 

The momentum of civilisation should not 
be our human goal, but rather the humble, 
dignified freedom of every person. So, vigeat 
veritas et pereat mundus - let truth prosper though 
the world perish. And if it does not perish, that is 
also fine. 

Humble freedom is a good term to express 
what all this is gesturing towards. The humble 
freedom to accept nature as an inaccessible idea, 
beyond correctness or incorrectness, that delivers 
to us the world, but also, critically, the humble 
freedom to not feel responsible for making perfect 
choices in our imperfect capacity. There is 
something to be said here for the notion of 
quietism, of accepting things as they are, from our 
position of limited knowledge, without actively 
seeking to change them. 

I would go further and say we cannot 
change things even if we do seek this action, not in 
the way that we can be sure we are making an 


401 


impact in the right direction. Which parent, which 
teacher, can say with certainty that the children 
they cared for turned out a certain way, for better 
or worse, because of their intervention. I'm not 
talking about extraordinary acts of trauma or 
salvation here, but simply that we are surely 
overestimating the contingency of our actions if 
we see pedagogical influence as responsible for the 
result of the life of a child. Nature is perfect, but 
nurture is not. 


2.2 


In my life I have known three Michaels. 
Two of them were mates I went through school 
with, and one was a student I taught. The two I 
went through school with both excelled socially 
and academically. They were nice young lads, on 
the path to post-school prosperity. The Michael 
that I taught, the student, however had every card 
seemingly stacked up against him. 

According to his lengthy diagnostic record 
he was diagnosed as autistic, had a significant 
intellectual disability and had _ challenging 
communication and associated mental health 
needs. I always remember how much he loved 
pulling electronic machinery to pieces. But, where 
are the three Michaels now that they have all been 
out of school for some time? 

The two Michaels who are my mates, with 


402 


all their educational successes behind them, they 
have both struggled to find stable careers, one of 
them has experienced complicated relationship 
challenges that has caused him a great deal of 
grief for the past fifteen years, whilst the other has 
struggled by not finding any significant personal 
relationship in his life so far. Both now struggle 
with mental health and physical needs, and so on. 

The Michael I taught, the one with his 
cards seemingly stacked up against him by nature 
- for the past half decade he has been working in 
an electronics workshop fixing up broken 
machines brought to him. He says he loves 
heading into work each day, he has a great 
network of friends around him, and his family told 
me recently that his quality of life has never been 
higher. 


2.3 


What are we to think in the face of such 
unpredictable narratives, of trajectories that many 
times over show us that we cannot read the future, 
except to consider how we might face this 
uncertainty with a humble modesty, and the 
freedom to not be weighed down by choices before 
us when we are raising and teaching the young 
people that nature has presented us. 

As a special educator, there have been 
many days in which it has seemed incredibly 


403 


important to take a firm stand on the decisions 
that should be made regarding the lives of the 
children and young people I have been employed 
to support. There is a phrase in ecology, coined by 
Aldo Leopold, that seems pertinent here, not least 
because the idea of neurodiversity rises from some 
of what we have gleaned of biodiversity - the 
phrase is, to think like a mountain. 

Leopold noticed that wolves on mountains 
were being killed by hunters, allowing deer to live 
without risk of being preyed on by the wolves. 
Soon, the deer ate all the grass, all the bushes, and 
starved. What was the lesson learned? That we are 
not great judges of recognising the results of our 
actions within the more complicated, chaotic 
ecosystem of our world. Nature is perfect, but we 
are not. 

I am reminded of the joke about the 
church minister and the gardener. A church 
minister is walking down a street and sees a 
beautifully tendered garden. The grass is like a 
bowling green, the flowers, glorious in their 
colours and their engineered bedding 
arrangements, smile their faces towards the sun, 
and the minister sees the gardener and says, oh 
what a testimony to the grace of god this garden is. 
The gardener looks up and says, oh no, you should 
have seen this place when it was left up to god. 


404 


2.4 


Is there not a punchline reversal here. The 
intention of the joke is to point out that left to its 
own devices, to god, nature is a tangle of unsightly 
mess. But, with some nurturing, it can be made 
good. However, what I would say is that before the 
gardener was present, nature was neither correct 
nor incorrect, it was beyond our subjectivity, 
beyond human judgement. The presence of the the 
gardener is the birth of subjectivity, and with it the 
need to tell a story about nature, to do something 
with it, to turn the garden into civilisation. 

So, what to do? What is the right decision? 
My son is fourteen months old, I have a daughter 
who is eleven. I have already experienced many 
minutes for which there was time for decisions 
and revisions that a minute would reverse if such a 
thing were possible. 

My consideration, my humble freedom, as 
a parent and as a special educator, is to recognise 
that so long as my intentions are authentic, that is, 
so long as I am considering the stories that rise out 
of our inability to know nature and I am leaning 
into what feels right for the individual, for my son, 
my daughter, my students, on their terms, not 
within the scope of what appears suitable to 
civilisation, if I can think like a mountain, can 
think of the three Michaels, then I might approach 
commitment to an ethical act of nurture, 


405 


regardless of the outcomes. 

What else is there to do. The garden needs 
to be tended, but there are many variations on the 
theme of a garden that have yet to be considered. 
Nature is perfect, but we do not need to be. 


406 


407 


408 


Scenes from 
'A Complicated Surgery Will Take 


Place On The Beach Tonight’ 
(Novel) 


When I first saw my wife some fifteen 
years ago she was a cat balancing on the table of a 
dress shop. The way she twirled in my direction 
and looked at me with those big watermelon eyes 
like green flowers drifting through space in front 
of the sun. This is still the way I see her today every 
time she looks at me. She is a nurse car rying a 
samurai sword and she is a wooden fence covered 
in ivy that surrounds an old school hall filled with 
brass musical instruments. In the evening when 
she wraps a towel around herself and leaves the 
bathroom after having showered she is a five foot 
eight wet paintbrush ready to absorb the entire 
spectrum of light. She paints a fully realised 
simulation of our world on the reverse side of her 
eyes and too on my eyes which truth be told are 
more like concrete roundabouts on the outskirts 


409 


of some industrial sector of the city not yet 
populated. Regardless she never fails to look deep 
into them and apply thick layers of gouache using 
her curiously unique interpretation of shading and 
tone that calms us at the end of the day. 


I used to believe there was a foundational 
concrete mathematical reality that must reside at 
the centre of the world to provide a platform for 
some unknowable unspeakable truth to stand atop 
in order to give our daily reality its solid form. It 
would take some years until I realised that each 
time I thought I could hear some truth at the 
centre of the world I was actually only listening to 
an echo rising from the centre of myself. A magma 
fueled reverberation of low droning bass notes 
phasing from my unknowing heart. 

Aimless walks are a gift. These past four 
days I have been mostly successful enough at 
extracting myself from the bedroom so as to topple 
out the front door and onto the street where I 
bounce down octaves towards the triangular 
shards of light in the quiet parts of the city. 
Newcastle is the seventh largest city in Australia 
and while I never thought I would be someone who 
is explicitly proud of where they live I actually do 
rather love the psychogeography of the place. 
Socially and politically it has its challenges like 


410 


anywhere does but you forget all about that when 
you start meandering its bite sized labyrinth of 
streets that rise and fall between harbourside 
industry and lighthouse shine through to a 
beachscape shadowed by military fortifications 
and unpredictably silent tree lined corridors that 
lead through to empty cinemas and orchard 
courtyards out the back of hospitals that are slowly 
being converted into robotics warehouses. 

I am still surprised at just how many 
spaces in the city I come across for the first time 
which for an area that only stretches some five 
square kilometres feels like a curious personal 
oversight. Just yesterday I visited the site of an old 
pub I had never seen before that is in the late 
stages of natural deconstruction. I researched it 
when I got home to learn that it was once a very 
popular local establishment until it became 
economically unviable. On their final night of 
trade a huge public gathering turned up to 
celebrate the end by rocking out to a band who 
were prematurely shut down by the police which 
subsequently triggered one of the biggest urban 
riots in the history of our country. The ground 
floor has just a few brick walls still standing in 
open air that house some basins and toilet bowls 
leading around the comer to a severely damaged 
stairwell that connects the first floor of the pub 
where you ascend and are brought face to face 
with an enormous oak tree. The oak rises from the 


411 


very middle of the pub into a balcony area that 
looks down to where the bar would have once 
been. I have no idea what sort of chemicals must 
be beneath the foundations but whatever is there 
has given the tree a supercharged boost of fertility 
to allow such immense growth in the twenty or so 
years since the pub has been closed. 


When I am alone in a foreign city I feel a 
rarified sense of freedom. The feeling of being 
outside the otherwise terminal grip of 
responsibility to incoming phone calls and 
messages because while I am awake in this new 
time zone I know that business hours are finished 
for the day back at home and as a result I am 
answerable to nobody. In this state I can get 
dressed in comfortable attire and take a few 
dollars with me for food and water and then I can 
head out through the front of the hotel and just 
walk. I can give myself over to the lightness of a 
momentum that holds no serious intention of 
direction and instead just allows me to fall 
forwards in the most loose and uncertain of ways 
through ambiguous veins of urban passage 
without any discernible pattern. My __ steps 
disappear me from any former lines of contact 
with the outside world. And by outside world I 


412 


mean my goal is to reach a nonposition. If I were a 
directional arrow on a digital map I would aim to 
blink off the side of the screen beyond the city 
beyond the beach and even beyond the ocean 
without any ability to be recovered. 

The evening after I met a twenty year old 
medical intern at a Street Fighter arcade video 
game tournament who I would later go on to 
marry but who at the time was just a girl I was in 
massive sensory debt to I remember sitting on a 
train traveling from Newcastle to Maitland nearby 
where she lived. In the carriage I began to write 
the outline of a story that I would go on to plan 
and tinker with in a condition that fifteen years on 
still remains unfinished. I gave it the name of the 
first sentence I wrote on my pad that day which 
was 


A Complicated Surgery Will Take Place 
On The Beach Tonight. 


The story opens on two protagonists 
standing on the rooftop of Bolton Street car park 
in the middle of Newcastle in the dark of night. 
When I first introduce Katita our best guess is she 
has something to do with the medical profession 
but there are no certainties here. Yes she has a first 
aid kit strapped to her belt but then she also has a 
bastardised samurai sword hanging from her 
back. She looks ready for war as she wears a flak 


413 


jacket covered in red desert sand but then she is 
also wearing thigh high socks and yes those are 
kitten heels all shiny and red and highly reflective 
in the moonlight. Red is a theme here. Her red hair 
and the cross on her first aid kit and the sand on 
her body and it could just be dry tears having 
mixed with the dirt on her face but it would not be 
out of the question to say there has been a film of 
deep red blood wiped across it not long ago. 


Newcastle Station is a skeleton horse 
made of iron kneeling down inside a broken clock. 
There are matrices of high metal in runs of 
chromatic rusting that weave in and out of 
wooden girders and loose rail wires across four 
empty platforms. Sunset is around an hour away 
although it feels to me like sunrise as I have slept 
all day after the biggest night of my life. This is two 
thousand and one and I just turned eighteen a few 
months earlier and even today at my desk I can 
still feel my heart pulsating with historic surplus 
energy as I think back to those moments in which 
the train pulled away from the station towards the 
rural pastureland of Maitland nearby where the 
cause of this surplus lived. 


414 


Even though it was two thousand and one 
I still had a cassette player because I liked creating 
mixtapes and I did not yet own a compact disk 
burner. The internet was still quite new to family 
homes and on a dial up modem I would scan 
through at a glacial pace a network of sparsely 
coded music websites built of small blinking text. 
Some of the pages felt like perhaps only two or 
three other people had ever visited them and 
indeed on some of these pages there were number 
tickers that said you were visitor number twelve to 
the page for example. 

At times the visiting of these websites felt 
like standing in a suburban backyard that had 
been owned by only a single elderly couple who 
built the place sixty years earlier and maybe upon 
the flat concrete near the garage and the 
clothesline where the sun descended in unfiltered 
brackets there had stood across the past half 
century only a handful of other people. A mechanic 
fixing a lawn mower or the children from a 
neighbouring yard retrieving a ball that flew too 
high. Or someone like me who wandered into the 
yard when the couple had passed away and 
considered how intensely monastic the space was. 
How many silent string quartets could play 
noteless odes to loneliness there. I feel that I was 
likely first imagined in a space like that pre zygote. 

Antithetical to these muted daytime 
reveries were the strange internet radio stations 


415 


that broadcast during the middle of the night from 
who knows where that I would search out and 
absorb the playlists of with their experimental 
electronic tunes I would immediately dub to 
cassette. Later when I would listen to the tracks I 
had no idea what any of the tunes were called 
which in my mind made the music all the more 
exotic and lush. One of the radio websites I 
remember presented a testimony from a recent 
listener who wrote that they were a fireman from 
Poland who listened to the broadcast during late 
nights at the fire station and how they thought it 
would be pertinent to provide all young children 
across the country with laptop computers so these 
children could start creating electronic melodies 
just like those played on the site which would in 
time give rise to a new folk music for the country 
and out of this music would come new folk dances 
and fairy tales and all the rest. So many times in 
recent years I have searched across the internet for 
the text of this statement in case it was saved on a 
website somewhere but it appears to have 
disappeared forever. 

I feel that all music at its core is always 
attempting to emulate the human voice. The 
central sound of our human existence is the sound 
of our name being said by our mother and to goa 
little further I think that our name and indeed all 
words that evolved out of our names are 
themselves an attempt to emulate the rhythm of 


416 


the heartbeat we share for a time with our mother. 
Beach for example is one thump of a heartbeat. 
Surgery is three thumps and not only is it three 
thumps but it is a very particular kind of heartbeat. 
It is a heartbeat that is attempting to skip a beat 
perhaps due to adrenalin or some other chemical 
or condition. That being understood I would 
encourage you to listen to any piece of music 
whether it be a percussive techno dance banger or 
a noisy rocker with walls of feedback or a gentle 
piano nocturne and listen to how the sound 
sources are attempting to mouth a word. Listen to 
the notes of the piano as they try to mimic lips and 
tongue. The guitar and drums as they do their best 
mimicry of consonants and vowels. Singing is 
obviously an easy give away but do cast your head 
back to the first slaps on the stretched skins of 
animals and imagine a name being cast into the 
air. 

Let us recap the formula. Your name is the 
product of the sound of a beating heart. Music is 
created the moment an instrument begins to 
emulate the voice of your mother articulating your 
name the way she heard it when you were a heart 
beating inside of her stomach. When we listen to 
music the water in our brain is stimulated to ripple 
in shapes that form the shape of our name. Or 
similar. 


417 


My wife once told me a story about a time 
she was alone in the bush with her sketchbook and 
charcoal and when I say she told me the story once 
I am being quite literal as she has only ever 
mentioned it the one time and when I made 
reference to it some years later she experienced an 
involuntary physical reaction that told me she had 
no intention of ever talking about it again. The 
story which I will share here for now but may be 
removed later if my wife requests for it to be taken 
out is that she was walking along a rusty rail line 
from the previous century which must have been 
used to transport coal through the bush back when 
that industry was literally shaping the area. She 
looked up for a reason she could not account for 
and saw in front of her perched on the rail line a 
bird of a variety that she had never before seen. 
The bird looked directly at my wife and made a 
noise that she had never before heard from a bird 
or any other animal or part of nature or machine 
for that matter. She stared at the bird wondering 
if she should open her sketchbook and draw it or 
whether this would frighten the bird away. As it 
turns out she had already begun to do exactly this 
and immediately the bird flew up above the trees 
and was never to be seen or heard by her again. 

When I asked my wife to describe the bird 
to me her face instantly turned to shadow. She 
went to efforts to explain just how intrinsically 
linked the sound was that the bird made to the 


418 


appearance of the bird and that any accurate 
description of the bird must simultaneously share 
the phenomena of both its visual and audible 
elements. However the more she described the 
physical appearance of the bird the less she was 
able to recall how the bird sounded. And when she 
would start to recall the sound the bird made she 
would lose sight of what the bird looked like and 
further to this the details would corrupt and 
change so that a sound she was almost completely 
sure of when she was focused on describing what 
she heard of the bird would in a few seconds 
change into something entirely different when she 
attempted to then get into the details of what the 
bird looked like. She eventually became so 
exasperated at trying to recall the bird to me that 
she jumped up from the bed and left the room in 
such a rush of emotion as I had never witnessed 
from her before. I only tried to bring the subject up 
again once after this and then I realised I should 
probably never raise it again but there have been 
times when I have seen the way she turns towards 
the resounding of a sudden trumpet or horn as are 
sometimes practiced in a hall a couple of streets 
over from our house or even the way she looks at a 
particular arrangement of branches in a tree from 
time to time when I know she must still think 
about the bird she saw and heard that day on the 
rail in the bushland. I am sure she must hope it 
will one day manifest itself in front of her again. In 


419 


saying this she has not been back to that bushland 
for over twenty years so perhaps she is not so 
preoccupied with finding the bird as I assume. 


The bus pulls up on Beaumont Street right 
outside The Watt. This is not only one of the most 
historic pubs in the area but also for sure one of 
the most unpredictable establishments in the city. 
It is still to this day the only place I have ever 
witnessed homemade outdoor fireworks released 
indoors and when you ordered a steak you never 
quite knew if the chef was going to remember you 
asked for it medium rare or whether the chef was 
going to be tackled to the floor of the kitchen by 
police on an almost nightly raid of the 
establishment. The Watt was the first place I ever 
saw drugs being visibly handled and the first place 
I ever saw a fist fight between adults break out. 
Once I was walking past and a young professional 
looking chap in his early twenties walked out the 
front doors of The Watt and all of a sudden a red 
sedan careened down the middle of the street and 
slammed the breaks on beside this young chap and 
then whoever was in the passenger seat pulled out 
a rifle and pointed it right in his face. The young 
chap reached into his suit pocket and pulled out a 
huge bundle of hundred dollar notes as in there 
must have been around five or ten thousand 


420 


dollars there and he threw it in the window of the 
sedan and then it sped off down the street. It was 
that kind of pub. 

But it was also the kind of pub that had the 
best bands and a really interesting mix of people 
from the arts students who walk down from 
Islington who I can see tonight such as these 
couple of poet dudes with their long hair and thin 
arms wrapped around their noise musician 
girlfriends with piercings all over and an absence 
of any underwear and then you have the big guys 
in from the wharf who have docked at the 
Carrington coal loader and they might be just in 
from Singapore or from China and they are of 
every nationality you can think of with tattoos on 
their forearms and their thighs and faces that to 
my eyes always demand to be read in combination 
of each other like hieroglyphics on a wall but 
because the sailors keep moving around they tell a 
story without a definite beginning or conclusion 
and because of this the content contained within 
their ink tells something utterly true about the 
narrative data running beneath the skin of the 
world and then on past these sailors you have the 
taxi drivers hanging around the front doors 
smoking and waiting for their next shift to start 
and while they were very rarely involved in fist 
fights I have seen more than a couple of them 
throw a glass into the pub like a hand grenade that 
started many of the worst brawls that they would 


421 


then stand and laugh about from the sidelines and 
of course it would be remiss to not mention the 
peculiar family friendly vibe injected by a few of 
the patrons as you have locals in pressed suits and 
married couples in groups wearing organic shirts 
and pants abiding that tightrope aesthetic of free 
thinking progressives and the mortgages they 
chum butter for every week day and just to wrap 
up the scene I would also make mention of the 
university students in polo shirts and thongs 
playing complicated board games near the music 
stage and the electronic slash country slash dub 
reggae fusion band setting up near them and the 
bar staff who are absolute athletes in the manner 
they are able to move around the bar and dive 
between each others legs in order to get past with a 
glass of bourbon and a packet of nuts and not to 
say anything here about the long term residents 
who live above the bar area who are a whole story 
all of themselves and while I have only been 
eighteen for a few months and hence have only 
been coming to places like this for a short while I 
can honestly say that sure of course absolutely it is 
true I have only just met this girl and am only just 
starting to get a read on her but I can think of no 
other place in the world that will make more of an 
impression of the kind I am trying to make in 
terms of a heightened sense of stimulation and 
fascination and why not once more call it what it is 
which is a certain sense of danger that can only be 


422 


forged here at the Watt Hotel. 

It is one thing to be able to entertain 
yourself. I have invested a major portion of my life 
into recognising how I am best entertained and 
how to replicate this whenever the conditions are 
suitable. To commence the best sequence of lights 
and colours and sounds and gradients of tactile 
feedback that stimulate just the right sort of 
emotional stew to fizzle and reflect up against all 
the interior surfaces of my skull. Like I have 
mentioned before this reflection is important 
because for something to exist it must have a 
mirror double. To remember that you have a world 
outside of your head you must find a way to mirror 
it from the inside. For me this is what guides me 
when I sit across from a beautiful redhead nurse in 
training with green space flower eyes and cosplay 
fox ears after we order some pork belly bites and 
fries and whatever else we could afford on a salary 
of historic pinball compositions and first aid 
internship money. We had a beer each and clinked 
bottles together in cheers as I unleashed all the 
lights and colours and sounds and gradients of 
tactile feedback that I could infuse into my words 
as I attempted to show this beautiful girl just what 
a rich interior life I had and what a carnival of 
ideas I could blast confetti style all over the dinner 
table. What else could I do. Play it cool and ask her 
questions about her life. I only learned to do that a 
couple of months ago. 


423 


That night eighteen years ago when we 
embraced on the beach together and I pushed my 
face into her breasts and listened to the chambers 
of her heart move a couple of dozen litres of blood 
around her body and she pushed her left ear 
against the top of my head to hear all the tiny 
mechanical gears spin into each other and 
generate just enough friction to cause the sort of 
warmth that gives birth to consciousness. I could 
not have anticipated the life to come from that 
moment. Earlier in the night on the bus when she 
asked if we were passing from the underworld to 
the world of the living or the other way around I 
now know that the answer was yes. It was both of 
these things and would be for every single day we 
lived our lives together. 

Afterwards when she was lying in my arms 
on the declivity of a sand dune that cradled several 
other sand dunes in a fold of shadows that 
flattened out to the shoreline with her red hair 
strewn across my chest she looked into the sky and 
asked if I could hear that. I said I could hear the 
ocean and she said not the ocean. Can you hear the 
sound of the earth rubbing against space. Look up 
towards the curved roof of the world and listen. 
She said that is the Karman line. The layer of 
atmosphere that is technically the last piece of our 
earthly sky before it transitions to outer space. She 


424 


said you can hear the curvature of atmosphere 
pressing against the pressure of all surrounding 
space anytime you are surrounded by 
environmental silence. Can you hear that low 
droning tone. I said I could not. She pressed 
herself further into me and said that sometimes 
the sound causes her to feel nauseous. I meant to 
ask her how she knew so much about space but it 
turned out to be another one of those things I 
assumed I would ask a little later on and then 
never got around to. 


Leif and Katita. Not my name and not hers 
and yet these were the two I settled on. I had used 
Leif as a name many times in my writing in the 
past as an anagram of Life. Katita was a new one 
though and I can only assume at the time I was 
thinking about the fox ears that my wife was 
wearing the night before and how I must have 
moved from canine to feline as she certainly 
shared many more personality traits what with her 
watermelon eyes and so on which must have been 
how I synthesised the name Katita for my female 
protagonist. Looking out at the towns I passed 
from the inside of the train carriage on by Hexham 
and Tarro and Beresfield and the way the city of 
Newcastle gave way to the pastures and dusty 
platforms of these little country towns that would 


425 


become more rural with every passing stop. It is 
not quite accurate to say that the electric lights of 
the city were gradually replaced with the oil lamps 
and candle flames of the countryside but it 
certainly could be said that the full moon over 
Maitland was being turned up in incremental 
clicks of brightness and clarity that rendered it as a 
much more tactile piece of concrete space than I 
had ever been exposed to and it reminded me how 
in those twenty four hours since first meeting the 
girl who would go on to become my wife and 
during the twelve hours since I had last seen her I 
was driven as if by an invisible force to reach out 
and touch things with my hands in such a way that 
my fingers were honestly just craving any smooth 
line or tom ridge of the world to caress and feel 
and remember whether this was on earth or as was 
not immediately apparent to also crave the surface 
of anything outside the earth as well. 


After taking a shower and considering my 
modesty before the glass windows that buffered 
me from the vast desert world of Shanbudia I 
recall how for each of the six mornings I stood and 
looked out like this I was never anything less than 
completely awestruck by just how foreign this view 
was to anything I had ever seen before. Beyond the 
immediate motorways and apartment buildings 


426 


copy and pasted ad infinitum as simulacra of the 
life to come that stretched deep into the distance 
there was a surrounding kingdom of sand that 
blanketed every patch of vision otherwise void of 
construction. In the middle of each night I would 
wake and look from my balcony out to the horizon 
and would see small handfuls of light bleeding at 
positions I understood belonged to the cities of 
neighbouring countries. During the day it was 
impossible to see these distant cities as the glare 
from the sky had a way of smudging all details into 
one broad expanse of light that erased definition 
beyond the hotel. 

I would be surprised if there had been 
more than one single thought in my head on that 
final morning when I got dressed and walked out 
of the apartment. The night before was definitely 
not in my head. That came later. The only 
conscious intention I had that morning was to 
walk in a spirit of blank minded meandering and 
so I walked through the hotel from the twelfth 
floor down to the ground and out to the driveway 
where palm trees formed a turning bay beside a 
large white sculpture that looked like a solar flare 
rendered in concrete. Previous mornings when I 
stepped out there were a dozen pale saffron taxi 
vehicles parked and waiting for passengers and yet 
this morning they are not here. Not only that but 
the hotel employees that usually stand out here 
and welcome new visitors to the hotel and farewell 


427 


those leaving are not present either. Come to think 
of it there was nobody in the lobby this morning 
either. From the pool area through the breakfast 
dining room and the lobby and onto the driveway 
the hotel was as silent as it was humid which is to 
say that it had as much commotion as morning 
traffic on the moon. 

At the bottom of the hotel driveway a 
single road splits into what appears as a hundred 
different exit routes that wind into onramps and 
causeways. They extend across fountain soaked 
pikes and disappear into shopping centre car 
parks and other temples of synthesised nature 
with the most extraordinary interiors that 
replicate snow covered ski slopes and underwater 
aquariums filled with manta rays and exotic fish 
and even sharks that must be very well fed or at 
least sedated in some manner as they do not give 
the usual victims in the tank a second look. In less 
than ten hours I will be boarding my flight home. 
Perhaps I should walk to the airport from here. It 
would take at least a twenty minute hike along the 
main highway before you get off the strip and into 
any sort of neighbourhood or change of scenery. 
Fortunately there are no cars on the road this 
morning so I am not only at no risk of being 
knocked by speeding traffic but I am also allowed 
the rare freedom of walking on the highway itself. 
Typically this is in no way a city to be walked. At 
first I stick to the lane of ongoing traffic but as I 


428 


keep looking back to sight any approaching cars 
and see nothing but empty space I eventually move 
into the very middle of the highway. There is no 
barricade dividing the traffic traveling south from 
the traffic traveling north so I literally am able to 
walk up the middle of the highway with one foot in 
the lane traveling south and one foot in the lane 
traveling north. 

I can see that around two kilometres down 
the road an exit ramp turns left and then swings 
into a bridge that crosses the highway and heads 
towards what appears as a miniature city from this 
distance and is from what I can make out one of 
the nearest populated areas to walk to. Certainly 
there are some businesses dotted along the sides 
of the highway such as self storage warehouses 
and car yards and industrial sales supplies but like 
the road they are all void of activity this morning 
and even if they were not I had no interest in 
surveying sites of that nature. As much as I do love 
the efficient anonymity of industrial business 
areas and the grand barcode highways that roll up 
to and past them like some heavy concrete tongue 
depressors holding down whatever antique strips 
of nature are saying ahh beneath them it is not this 
sort of experience I am seeking but rather I want 
the more intimately rapid navigation of laneways 
and stairwells in order to participate in as much 
antigeometry as urbanism can perform. My only 
real question at this distance is whether I slowly 


429 


veer left and walk onto the exit ramp proceeding to 
then cross the bridge and into the city or whether I 
can simply veer right and head up what appears as 
a sandy embankment that will then take me to the 
same position the bridge connects to. I have 
twenty minutes of empty highway wandering to 
decide on the best course of action with still no 
sign of any cars either in the lane of my left foot or 
of my right. 


As the density of red gums reduced and 
the woodland bush dispersed behind us I asked 
Les about the approaching fields. They are of a 
highly manicured variety not at all similar to the 
rough tumble of paddocks we pressed alongside to 
get into the bushland. Again Les appeared to have 
no idea what he was looking at as he grimaced and 
stumbled out some words like well it must be out 
the back of or perhaps this is where no that would 
be further south ah. We both spotted what looked 
like chicken coops and greenhouses right on the 
crest of the field which we agreed we should 
explore. While we walked there Les pointed 
pieces of nature out to me like a bee dancing 
around a tumble of lavender. He said watch the 
looping patterns it moves through. This is how 
they will teach programming languages to 
children in the future. Watch how the wings open 


430 


in a cascade and vibrate with a softness so foreign 
to our current mechanics. I said oh I reckon you 
could recreate those physics with an ace of spades 
and a rubber band and Les laughed and shook his 
head. He said this landscape is becoming 
increasingly low polygon. The warmth of the sun 
feels so geometric. 

Les described how he wanted to start 
generating cryptocurrencies out the back of his 
yard with a few weatherproof microprocessors in 
plastic bags connected to wind turbines he would 
stick on top of stakes by the fence line. I thought 
that sounded like a great idea. When we squinted 
into the low clouds hanging above the couple of 
hundred metres before us we were convinced we 
could see streaming data pouring down from them 
in some sort of augmented reality sun shower. The 
data precipitated shapes that we were trying to 
decode. One of the shapes was of a battleship. 
Another of a nurse wielding a sword. Plates of food 
and visions of sunset that populated into dustings 
upon the fields before us. An alligator clip and a 
sundress to compress. 


Les and I sat on chairs that faced each 
other at the far end of the table. Next to Les sat a 
lady in her say forties or early fifties with shoulder 
length hair that ran from cherry blonde to fog grey 


431 


in a spectrum of light that shifted in uncertain 
ways within the dimness of the hall. She wore 
bright red lipstick and had cheeks that connected 
to her nose in ways that I can vividly remember 
but can barely describe with any accuracy the 
manner in which the slouched and languid 
trajectories of her cartilage filled me with a sense 
of magnetic calm that I kept returning to 
throughout the night. 


There is a stretch of coast up here before 
you get to Port Rhombus proper where the land 
heading inland enters a declivity of shadowed 
pastures that never quite seem to catch the sun. By 
the time high clouds pass the fields in the morning 
and the afternoon light descends behind crowned 
rock canopies the world has turned so far on its 
side that it is only the river system across the 
highway that catches any direct heat. This is where 
the thin rows of purple saffron flower are grown in 
the region. Fragile tissue paper petals reach 
towards where they last felt warmth from the 
atmosphere perhaps from a passing satellite or a 
rocket expiring its fuel while their stiff yellow spice 
rods jut out the middle and throw wide the red 
floral stigma ribbons that hold their position from 
the inside like a celebration frozen in a state of 
hung architecture. 


432 


On this occasion my wife says to slow 
down and we pull off to the side of the road and 
get a closer look at the flowers. Usually if we stop 
like this beside a field we would make sure our car 
windows were wound up due to spots like this 
being such a haven for bees so I am surprised 
when my wife opens her door and walks towards 
the field. She implores me to get out and look as 
well. I can see what she is referring to as I unclip 
my buckle. Today this field is not filled with bees. It 
is filled with hundreds of tiny mechanical drones. 


Through the courtyard I come across a 
paediatric wing of the hospital I do not remember 
passing through on the way here. There is a 
classroom and a recreation room for kids who are 
patients here at the hospital. It looks as though in 
the recreation room the nurses are putting on a 
dance party for a dozen children aged between say 
six and fourteen. The nurses have an old record 
player they are loading classic disco dance records 
onto. I recognise one of the labels on a record 
being put back into its sleeve as Outa Space by 
Billy Preston so I stop to watch through the door 
for a moment. 

They seem to be having some trouble 
keeping the record spinning. The nurse puts on 
the record and the kids listen to it for a few bars 


433 


before really getting into it as they start wildly 
dancing around the room. When they start 
dancing however they stomp the floor so much 
that it shakes the record player and the needle falls 
off the groove of the record. The nurses start the 
record again and sure enough the same thing 
happens. When the record starts to get just the 
right beat going for the kids to dance to they 
destroy the song by dancing to it. Outa Space fails 
due to how groovy it is. The fact it is such a dance 
worthy tune ensures that it will not be able to be 
danced to. Perhaps there is another record that is 
somewhat dance worthy but not so much that 
everybody actually wants to move to it. Some 
happy middle ground. No. Come on. The record 
either inspires dance or it does not. If it does not 
inspire dance there is no point in putting it on. But 
if it does inspire dance then it cannot be danced to. 
Or maybe there is a way for these children to learn 
to dance in perfect synchronisation with the 
rotations of the record beneath the needle. If the 
children could dance in time with the slight 
fluctuations rising and falling from the vinyl then 
maybe they could avoid shaking the floor and 
knocking the record out of its groove. I picture the 
record going around and around in circular 
revolutions and the children dancing in similar 
geometric loops that weave together with the 
music to create some sort of perfect harmony. 


434 


You never outlearn 
the old mistakes of your youth. 
They are your first love, 


your footfalls of truth. 


I will finish by saying that I plan on taking 
a little trip inland shortly. Just for a few days. A 
couple of years ago I learned that after Les passed 
away his parents sold up the family property and 
moved far west of the state into the outback. I 
never really spoke to his parents after his funeral 
service. There are things I would like to share with 
them about their son that I now feel ready for ina 
way that I was previously not. I feel as if my inside 
is more fully connected to my outside if that makes 
any sense. Communication comes easier now. My 
eyes may never quite be the exploding stars of my 
wife or our beautiful little daughter but these days 
I feel like they are no longer concrete roundabouts 
on the outskirts of some industrial sector of the 
city not yet populated. Before our daughter was 
born my wife and I would entertain ourselves by 
walking around the streets here in Hamilton 
picking up little objects to put under a microscope 
on our dinner table. Now when I walk I feel like I 


435 


am rather magnifying myself. A map of my head 
filling up the lost streets. Maybe the poem is 
correct in that you never outlearn the old mistakes 
of your youth but in all honesty I tend to believe 
they were never really mistakes to begin with. 


436 


437 


438 


Just Talking About Pies 


The way to keep 

three small pies warm 
for the ride home 

is to buy seven and then 
use the warmth of 

the many to blanket 

the few. 


439 


440 


Not Dry 


i- Los Dos Hombres 


After setting up a short video camera 
tripod with a long cylinder fixed to the base the 
how many, the six members of the investigation 
team, they walk away from the cylinder as it emits 
a faint glow, a soft powder luminescence, 
flickering against the red stone pavers, the orange 
soft drink sunset, bubbles against the skyline, the 
bridge, the river and the marshland, the airport 
behind (how much is not enough when talking 
about nihilism), fizzing not so much with 
carbonation but, but with loading signal whir 
noise spin sputter, like the sound of fine silver 
gears spinning within the media of little angel 
wings hovering behind your head, your ears, 
loitering against the ratio, nearly there, extending, 
loading (if less is more than imagine how much 
more is). 

Without the sort of time or focus required 
to categorically describe each of the six members 
of the investigation team it might be rather easier 
to parse between them the following 
characteristics: five of the six are wearing 
headgear of which three could be described as 
helmets, one as a fishing hat with a halo above and 


441 


one is a modern looking jingasa with perhaps 
radio equipment sewn in; clothing across the team 
varies wildly although a colour consistency of navy 
and tan stay across the shawls, the armor, the 
trench coats, whatever else covers them; two are 
children, one is a girl in her twenties with a dingo 
tail and pierced dingo ears with gold loops through 
the holes, is that too much detail, it draws the eye. 
I say to Les, did I ever read you the short story by 
Schopenhauer about the kids who receive a copy 
of Aesop’s fables from their mum and the kids 
throw it back at her and say, what, you want us to 
believe these stories of talking animals. Grow up. 

We turn to see a local lady, local to Les not 
to me, I am not from around here, thirties, five 
foot what, lime salted bob cut blonde, grey overalls, 
pull up against the jetty in her trawler, the capital c 
Collector they call her, they Les, they the local 
restaurant owners and who else. Always the same 
time of late afternoon, on a loop, with boxes full of 
disjecta found in the sea, mostly the bones of birds 
and animals that look like birds. She takes them up 
to her studio on the hill, we will see its lights turn 
on shortly through broad ocean facing windows 
after she carries her boxes to her salt rusted pickup 
and careens up the road where she will unpack and 
create a fossilised shadow theatre against the 
ceiling and the walls. 

Les says how appropriate for our dining 
this evening. You mean sea bird on the menu, no 


442 


he means the Mexican restaurant, Los Dos 
Hombres with its Day of the Dead colour palette 
and decor, Under the Volcano but Les they don’t 
serve alcohol here. He says that he drinks heavily 
these days and I say yes of course, I know, so do I. 
The six investigators patrol the waterfront only 
some ten metres from our table, scanning the 
ground with instruments, searching. So why a 
dingo says Les a little too loudly and don’t say D O 
G as in Nietzsche’s ‘Death Of -’ and the waitress 
says what can I get for you, I order the steak, 
chorizo and potato in pasilla sauce, Les a massive 
enchilada. Why not a cat and don’t say CA T as in 
‘Comedy And -’ Les gestures around him, ora BIR 
D and don’t say ‘Being Is Really - and he gestures 
again. 

The channel of water rolls in horrendously 
obtuse angles, generating creaking timestretched 
drone reverberations like those from falling 
glaciers, as a megafauna goat with hooves the size 
of ambulances trots down the middle of the river, 
stepping over the bridge now as it sloshes water 
onto the motorway, cars honking and turning on 
their windscreen wipers in defense. Pouring our 
drinks, the waitress leans her broad olive face 
towards Les and says, do you know what we call a 
goat with no hind legs. Gracias. She walks away 
ringing a bell like laugh that turns into an echo of 
little chimes as she puts on a stain glass cathedral 
headpiece that covers her face down to below her 


443 


chin. Beside the restaurant is a patch of synthetic 
grass that leads into a miniature golf arcade. The 
waitress stands on the grass with her back to the 
wall of the restaurant and, as a little white ball rolls 
between her legs, the cathedral lights up. 

The thing is Les, you area MAN you know 
all ‘Meaninglessness and ~’ thirty seven years of 
Nihilism no need to remind me, but that woman, 
sure, sure, just add ‘Wondering Overrides’ and you 
have yourself a remedy. Wondering as a verb, as in 
I am just wondering through the city. My man you 
are all G O O D (see you in the ‘Garden Of 
Ontological Divisions’) but I have let our 
friendship linger. A recommended memory 
notifies me of when we were young men with 
friends walking beneath some dreampunk moon 
towards the waves, a wall of light some three 
kilometres up the dunes all smoke filtered 
streaming from a chemical plant right there on the 
beach, sharing the grains with us so to speak, 
bathing its cylinders in the salt water as - well I 
cannot remember whether we did the same or not. 

Just like, Les says, how I cannot remember 
the reason for asking you down here, why you 
drove in the vein of the 1986 Sega arcade game 
Outrun, down a straight road, transitioning across 
ecosystems and time zones, reveling (he knows 
this) in a collage of colour and landscape and genre 
that saw me make this journey, only the second 
time in a decade, how sad is that. However unlike 


444 


Outrun there was no girl beside me to synchronise 
witness to the diamond ocean and ember sunset 
decline, to the synthesizer melodies bouncing 
down octaves, not trying to outrun police or even 
time for that matter but the other thing. What the 
investigation team is looking for, what the 
Collector is not coming home with. 

He says that he goes into space a lot these 
days, that he holds onto VHS tapes of Sol Bianca 
and tells everybody he is not really a tourist, that 
he is one of them, and I say of course, I know, so 
do I. The beach is the most moonlike area on earth, 
especially of a nighttime but even without the 
stars, it has that edge of consciousness feel to it. 
Step into the ocean and drift through space, push 
off from the moon dust that clings to your feet as 
you tumble away from the ground like a 
cannonball in love and then, hold on, into the black 
hole gob of a whale who wants to show you the 
future, but Les remember we do not listen to 
animals (see: Schopenhauer, see Space Whale 
Aesop). 

The burrito is half gone, no, completely 
gone, when Les says hey how have I finished 
already, did I even taste it, seriously where did it 
go. And then he says, come on why did I ask you 
down here, I honestly cannot remember. I suggest 
that he did not ask and he says come on man, you 
know what I mean, I was feeling down but now I 
feel something else. How do you feel. Well. I feel 


445 


like filtered light. How do you feel. I feel like the 
reason there was no girl beside me on the drive 
down is she is feeding our children at home. I feel 
like, you know how you see images these days of 
things that perhaps a human should not have 
access to. Lady bugs covered in a field of tiny dew 
drops that magnify their form into cellular bloom. 
Towering walls of salt coloured all gold and purple 
dripping thick gravities. Nano medical miracles 
blown up on _ billboards. High resolution 
psychogeographic walking tours of quiet places 
nobody except the unconscious locals ever visit. 
Bison at thirty seven below zero. 

I feel like, like how do you turn those 
image events, that seem beyond the frame of 
regular human observation, into metaphors that 
can meaningfully connect not just two disparate 
concepts but two people together. How when I 
used to play the electronic organ in nursing 
homes, show tunes of the twenties and thirties and 
forties, how everybody sang along. Les, imagine if 
we get to sit in a nursing home together one day, 
just what songs will our compatriots sing. Just 
think of the subgenres and niche fragmentations 
of culture and song we subscribe to. What will we 
sing together, other than Wonderwall. 

Perhaps we will just listen to waves at the 
beach. Not at the beach, of course. And, of course, 
of course, I already know the answer full well but I 
do not say it aloud lest the illusion be shattered, for 


446 


Les that is. But just between us it will be the same 
as Proust predicted when his narrator as a young 
man imagined what the theatre would be like, the 
spectators looking, quote, as through a 
stereoscope, at a scene that existed for himself 
alone, though similar to the thousand other scenes 
presented to the rest of the audience individually, 
end quote, translated. There is plein air painting 
happening beside the restaurant here, Les points 
at the painter, is he silhouetting us as we ask for 
the bill, is he swallowing the waitress in ink, no he 
is illustrating a QR code which, as darkness sets, is 
timeless black on black. 

I want to show you something. Put this 
stain glass cathedral headpiece on to see, well, not 
necessarily through a glass, darkly, more so 
through one window for each eye, through an 
algorithmic sequence of vowel shaped filtered 
lights that make it all seem so bloody real Les, can 
you feel the meaningfulness, the real thing, this 
apartment in Hong Kong, the background music 
like the muzak we used to listen to years before, 
that soft nineties female whispered vocal sample 
percussive ride cymbal night loop that makes you 
feel like you were given a name by the warmth of 
the universe, no longer an orphan of the 
underworld. Look at what I am wearing on my 
head now, is it coming through clearly. 

The apartment is stunning in a measure 
equal to most any fantasy of luxury emboldened by 


447 


your standard teenage capitalist raised on the sort 
of love lessons gained on the bow of space opera 
observation decks, of two in the morning airport 
shopping districts as you wait to fly in the opposite 
direction of wherever. Broad ocean facing 
windows, whales in the distance sure, but what 
about the birds Les, who dreamt them up, was it 
you, was it the Collector, gulls flying through the 
open doors, to the inside and to the out, like one of 
those menageries built into grand manor homes 
where peacocks walk from the dining room 
through to the garden alcove to drink from the 
fountains. Lo the birds do not smell, they do not 
defecate or leave feathers behind, rather they are 
splinters of light, weightless, shards of betwixt 
magnesium correcting the environment yes as fine 
white cursors blinking across, deleting for mercy, 
the simulated skyline. 

When the rain comes it brings with it a 
trolley problem. Do I let it rain on your headset 
and cause you to worry about the impact on the 
electronics (the shock of the real) or do I take the 
risk you will not notice and just allow the 
simulated wetness to embrace us (the virtual real). 
How would it be to just recline here as the water 
rises around us, the street lights warbling amniotic 
shine flutter through bleeding darkness, bubbles 
against the eye line, wow talk about real, Les. 
Perhaps we just need to get more sleep and drink 
more water, it could be that the antidote to 


448 


philosophy is interoception. Say you were to take 
the lit cathedral away from your head and notice 
you were yet wearing another cathedral, that 
beyond this level of simulation you were being 
stimulated by ever more fiction - what then. Have I 
just given the punchline away. Is it ok to laugh 
now. The thing about nihilism is that it helps us to 
believe in everything (the cylinder is an embryo). 


ii - Marigold and Butterfly 


We are following, somewhat, the 
topographical path observed, loosely, in a Brett 
Whitley painting. It has brought us here to this 
little town that I know like the inside of a 
calculator resting in the palm of my hand which is 
to say only somewhat, loosely (make sure to 
replace the round plastic backing of the calculator 
lest the numbers slip onto the ground of the little 
town and turn upside down). This will be the first 
evening of the trip that I will, verily, leave my wife 
in the hotel room while I head out for dinner, as 
who knew that one of my mates had moved here 
for cryptoagricultural work. He has a table 
reserved in a Thai restaurant. See you later 
tonight, I call out to my wife who is busy sitting 
cross legged on the smooth white bed covers of 
our, to my mind, Chinese decored room, 
illuminating the gold lamp shade, the gold and 


449 


burgundy sash across the foot of the bed (red and 
gold sunset was, for Whistler, a landscape mirror 
for the slides of blood he had observed beneath 
microscope in the seaside maternity hospital of his 
autumn years), with the glow cast from the 
holographic sculpture she is curating with a 
platform of light emitting diodes and penny 
tealight candles at her feet. 

Against the windows of the restaurant a 
light rain is gradually raising its dynamics. The 
food is wonderful and we are efficient with 
ordering and consuming. We talk all things crypto 
- cryptoagriculture on the blocksupplychain, 
cryptopastoralism rewriting the history of sun 
smudged wheat fields and the religions they 
harvest, cryptocurrencies which are nowhere near 
abstract enough for us, we wish they did not 
translate to real money at all (it is the concept we 
want to invest in, we want to become conceptually 
rich). After eating we head out into the rain which 
is now in full symphony, cryptorain perhaps in 
torrents, and my mate he says I know a bar the 
next block up, so we strafe puddles beneath us and 
awnings above until we get to the bar and of 
course, the pandemic, they have already met their 
quota for the night. The girl on the desk looks at us 
as if to say, how could you not have known, and 
how about not asking me if any other bar will have 
occupancy because I have enough to worry about 
here, while you want a clean well lighted place to 


450 


have a drink we are just trying to survive. So we 
say no problem and head back onto the street 
where, between the darkness and the rain, 
visibility is in low supply. 

We try another bar but we are both so 
utterly drenched, so heavy with water, our shirt 
pockets billowing with raindrops, that we cannot 
be sure if we are turned away because of our flood 
aesthetics or because this inn too is full. Time to 
wrap up the night, my mate hails a taxi and when 
the driver peels the window down a crack he yells 
at my mate, you better have a towel, to which my 
mate replies, you know we are like sixty percent 
water, and the taxi driver says yeah on the inside 
fella, come on, and I wave and head back to the 
hotel. I drip in the foyer, I drip in the hallways like 
I am twelve again and returning from the pool 
with squelchy rubber thongs on my feet and an 
itchy towel that will not hold up around my waist, 
and then knock knock my key is too wet to work so 
my wife opens the door and I let my heavy clothing 
slap on the floor until I am in the warm shower 
and then in a dressing gown on the edge of the 
bed. 

My wife with her antique heartwood bangs 
squirreled into a patch of gingham, coke bottle 
lenses (loupes, microscopes) pushed right up to 
the light wireframe lines of neon cast from the 
arrangement of LEDs and tealights networked 
across the bedspread, the outline of a marigold 


451 


from the stem up through the leaves to its 
immense floral head, and with its legs ingested in 
the glow of the petals a butterfly with its head bent 
south, within reach of being able to sip nectar 
from one of the moist florets, quote within reach 
unquote the critical term here as it is intentionally 
ambiguous as to whether anything is actually 
happening between the marigold and the 
butterfly. Ontologically speaking. After all, the 
seeds of the marigold are redacted and the 
butterfly can offer it nothing in terms of 
conveyance. This is not untoward code, this is 
literally the foundation of their nature, as 
observed. And yet they dance. To be sure, on a 
structural level, her architecturally shifting light 
pillars, yes say geodesic polygons lowing, no doubt 
they move now into bends, the lines subtracted 
into each other, replacing the overlapping waves 
with negative space and, of course of course, they 
bend into the shape of vowels and expire into 
hyperventilated panting. 

There are what they call dead malls, empty 
shopping centres no longer frequented with 
money, that, my wife says, you, that is me, 
fetishise. And there are shopping centres built 
across satellite districts in China that are never 
intended for use, their economic function is solely 
in their construction. So, she says, to the west you 
have expansive tiled amphitheater voids that have 
lived and died, and to the east you have ones that 


452 


have been born but cannot come to life. Which 
one, sweetheart, most resembles your soul. If only, 
she says, I knew the genealogy of your infatuation 
with lonely places. Yes, your parents cleaned 
empty libraries, after hours tourism depots, 
midnight council buildings all echo and cathode 
ray tube screensaver laden, distant train lights 
behind the carpark tundra, but is this really the 
reason you love me. 

We stare up at the ceiling, at a field of 
starlight residue cast up there against the pressed 
metal by the fading LEDs now sprinkled across the 
carpet, haphazard like the distribution of seeds in 
a country garden. The tealights are extinguished 
and sit smoldering faint gray plumes like those 
that might rise from the chimneys of toy houses 
that little well dressed bears and mice turn into toy 
homes. My wife says say cosmism but time stretch 
the consonants. She says that is the sound the 
universe will make when our minds reach peak 
intelligence and in a moment of revelation will set 
fire to the universe. You do not believe me, her 
words, staring roofward, our bodies parallel 
landscapes of milk and dynamite, I cough and she 
says, put yourself in the ethical shoes of Nikolai 
Fedorov, his vision of salvation where nobody 
would miss out on enjoying the results of future 
societal progress because death would be 
unimagined. Those who fought and labored for the 
fruits of other generations to receive, they would 


453 


not need die, because you see technological 
innovations, say cryptocollection, The Collector, 
will gather all the matter of deceased humans 
together to reform them, piece by piece. Look at 
the stars. Do you see Evald Llyenkov up there, now 
we live in a post death world, he says that through 
communism we will continue to evolve and 
flourish and develop to peak intelligence, I am 
repeating myself so you know the punchline, how 
in this post death world we will reach maximum 
consciousness and in a moment of cognitive bliss 
all matter in existence will be spontaneously set 
ablaze, causing the second Big Bang, resetting all 
creation so we can begin (be bang) again. 

The bedhead has a radio built into it. We 
listen to Japanese city pop, the same genre of tunes 
that Les and I listened to in the simulated Hong 
Kong apartment, those eighties pop gems from 
Japan that recreated the sounds of the Western 
seventies that had been pouring out of America. 
But we enjoy the facsimile versions so much more, 
not only because we cannot understand what the 
Japanese artists are singing, but because of the 
gap, the spatial delay, that this copied aesthetic 
presents. It is not just that the copy is inherently 
better, most often the songs are technically 
identical, although the Japanese tunes do have 
more synthesizers which is really cool, but you see 
it is rather that the distance between the copy and 
the original gives us the space we need to really 


454 


allow ourselves to fall into it wholesale, to submit 
to this sudden dream without forensic criticism, to 
lose ourselves in photocopied melodies like, well 
perhaps a little like Warhol, but more like a filter 
on a photograph of a landscape that improves its 
colours to a condition of inebriated simulacrum 
that nature could only aspire to. Sensory drunk on 
having been transported to a parallel version of 
your own history that feels more vivid in present 
retrospect than your own banal memories of the 
lived same. Kind of like how you fall in love with 
the image rather than the person, the empty 
shopping centre instead of the vacant head, the 
poem removed from its homeland, the analogy no 
longer with any family alive in these parts or, from 
what well versed authorities can ascertain, any 
other. 

Minutes from sleep we open the Internet 
Archive and look for a free text copy of our 
biographies to read. There are five million plus 
biographies on the site and we find our own 
separate life stories fairly quickly but it takes a 
little longer to track down a version of what might 
be our joined history. Each time we think we find 
our story, there is something in it, a detail, that 
casts us with a perspective that is not quite us, or 
at least it does not seem to be us. I turn to look at 
the face of my wife as she scans the screen, the 
wavelength of her cartilage, the country garden 
dice roll of her freckles, arcade machine blue glow 


455 


eye tutti between vanilla sclera refreshing, 
exchanging pixels with the monitor, and again 
with reference to Proust it was like how he saw the 
three steeples of Martinville and Vieuxvicq from 
the carriage, how they shifted into new ontological 
states depending on the perspective he was able to 
access at the time, so too as my wife turns her face 
I think, that is not her, that is not her, that is not 
her, ah yes that is her, there she is, revealed to be 
herself at a seventy three degree angle obtuse from 
the pillow. Turn the page and what about this one, 
that is not us, that is not us, that is not us, oh wait 
it is us to a tea. 

I see a book on the site that I read many 
years before, C.G. Jung and Hermann Hesse: A 
Book of Two Friendships, by Miguel Serrano. 
When I was a teenager twenty five years earlier 
running high on Germany philosophy I relished 
reading the warm conversations that Serrano, who 
had traveled all the way from Chile to wander 
through the rural outlays of Europe in search of 
these two men, had with these founts of insight 
into consciousness and spirituality and the impact 
of world war on what it was to be human in those 
days. They discussed archetypes, art, arbor 
metamorphosis and so on, all the things a fifteen 
year old craves to know about to help navigate 
nineteen nineties suburban life. Well imagine my 
surprise when I read an updated biography on the 
Internet Archive that describes this seemingly 


456 


balanced man, Miguel Serrano, this diplomat and 
yoga enthusiast who delivered these gentle 
conversations with our twilight luminaries on the 
lessons of radical kindness we can take from boys 
who turn into trees, how he, Serrano, on this very 
same trip to meet Jung and Hesse, was already 
deep in the vaults of Esoteric Hitlerism. So the 
website states he believed that the Aryan race was 
descended from extraterrestrials, he believed that 
Hitler had escaped Germany to live under the 
polar ice of Antarctica, possibly in dialogue with 
other Nazis who were living in the centre of our 
hollow earth, this was all in nineteen fifty one 
apparently, only a decade before Jung and Hesse 
would both be deceased. I lay back and look at the 
ceiling full of formerly deceased Communist souls 
being reconnected and brought back to life for 
celestial revelation. Wagner had Parsifal say that a 
wound can only be healed by the sword that made 
it, and maybe this is why it was so easy for a man 
who seemed devoted, through his recorded 
conversations, to the freedom and dignity of all 
humans, to also believe in the most bizarre and 
abhorrent ideas possible, because polar opposites 
are more intimately connected then disparate 
notions without any charge. 

The next morning I wake early and see 
that my wife is still sleeping. Hungry, I walk to the 
rooftop of the hotel in order to scan the horizon for 
sources of food only to realise that there is, hooray, 


457 


an edible garden right here on the rooftop. Of all 
the luck. I start with some Tuscan Baby Leaf Kale, 
then Oregano Cleopatra, some Boxwood Basil and 
Cha Cha Chives, Seychelles Beans, and then I taste 
something crunchy, dry, cereal like in texture it is, 
of course, part of the sandstone facade necklacing 
the garden. I scrape my teeth against the coarse 
surface and allow the detached particles to dance 
on my tongue before running down the back of my 
throat. They are like tiny seeds, similar to those 
found in tropical orchids. Luckily I have always 
enjoyed many calcium rich products across my 
thirty seven years so my teeth are diamond strong. 
After I finish the sandstone wall I move onto the 
roofing tiles that crunch like crispbread, then down 
into the ceiling of the hotel where I eat the air 
conditioning tubing, the electrical wires, the dust, 
swallowing as I walk to the wall and eat through 
the plasterboard, the bricks, the glass windows that 
crackle in my mouth like pop rocks, down through 
floors twenty to sixteen, I drink the pool water and 
eat the towels and diving board on floor fifteen, 
then proceed down through the subsequent floors 
until it is my wife who is awake and standing above 
me, my plump body spread out on the footpath 
outside with a heaving stomach, sure earlier I was 
quote hungry unquote but not necessarily quote 
eat a whole hotel hungry unquote. Well, my wife 
leans down and speaks into my eyes, she says, at 
least it was mostly hollow. 


458 


iii - Dephlogisticated Air 


It may storm or it may be a rather sunny 
day, at this stage it is a toss up. I head for a swim at 
the Bogey Hole, a sea bath constructed by convicts 
in the early colonial years of the city. When I arrive 
there are a half dozen young men and women 
standing on the steps that lead down its hillside, 
watching as the ocean heaves mountainous waves 
over the expanse of the hole. The Welsh poet 
Thomas Harri Jones drowned here under similar 
conditions in the sixties. I head down, stubbornly, 
to check out the conditions for myself and 
consider that the waves have significantly lessened 
by the time I am at the edge of the pool, however 
not thirty seconds after I dive in I look to the ocean 
and see a twenty foot wave making its ascent, 
shadowing the Bogey Hole and the hillside. No 
time to get out, I dive beneath the eruption of 
foam and grab onto two metal bars cast down 
beneath the hillside steps. The receding extraction 
of water pulls at me beneath the waves with severe 
force, as if some great aquatic vacuum cleaner is 
suctioning out all the foreign matter from the area 
to deposit far out in the depths of international 
waters. As the sea finishes taking back what it has 
given I breach and climb out and say to the 
concerned onlookers, well that is enough 
adventure for one day. 


459 


Still eager for a swim I walk around the edge 
of a public garden and onto a walkway that leads to 
the public city baths. There are some two dozen 
heads bobbing on the water, most of them wearing 
colourful swim caps, looking like candied fruits 
floating in a bowl of cyan punch. I am not a strong 
swimmer and this is my first time at the baths, so I 
walk out slowly from the ramp that slopes into the 
water, foot after tentative foot, waiting to see if the 
sandy bottom should give way to some bottomless 
trench at any moment. All the while I am walking I 
keep thinking how much I hope that I am able to 
walk the whole way across the baths because of how 
enjoyable it would be to just languidly stroll the 
length of the pool, first slowly one way, and then 
slowly the other, and then slowly back again, slowly. 
I want to live in slow motion, to live my best slow 
life. And then what do you know, this is exactly what 
happened. I made it all the way to the edge, some 
fifty metres from where I began on the ramp, now 
holding onto the wall that separates the baths from 
the ocean. Like they were at the Bogey Hole, the 
waves here are steep and pour over the edge of the 
wall, although granted have nothing of the ferocity 
from earlier. The water foams over and shakes the 
surface tension of the baths here at the edge but it all 
soon dissipates and returns to ease. After scanning 
the area for swimmers doing laps and realising that 
I am in a nonintrusive position, I lay back and take a 
deep breath and begin to float. 


460 


Intentionally, there is almost nothing on 
my mind. Well. What I am thinking about, the one 
alternative to nothing, while I float, is a video I saw 
earlier that morning. It is of a young lady in 
Myanmar, in an area near the parliament building, 
performing an aerobics routine in front of a 
camera on a tripod. She wears a neon green top, 
black tights and a medical pandemic mask. The 
song she dances to is a high energy electronic 
tune, lots of vocoder (how to recognise speech, 
how to wreck a nice beach) and distorted bass. And 
then, at nineteen seconds in, without her 
displaying any noticeable recognition to disrupt 
her dancing, a procession of black armored 
military vehicles stream in behind her, driving up 
to the parliamentary security checkpoint, and then 
on through the checkpoint. Some of the vehicles 
have police lights flashing, others have what look 
like mounted guns sticking out of their roofs. 
What we are observing here is the beginning of the 
military coup in Myanmar on the first of February 
two thousand and twenty one. Party leaders were 
taken away and members of parliament were 
placed under house arrest. On the website that I 
viewed the video on, the headline was: Dance 
Dance Revolution. 

This is what I am thinking about, while I 
float in the baths this morning. Dance Dance 
Revolution is a video game from nineties Japan 
that asks the player to perform dance steps in 


461 


accordance with colourful neon arrows that float 
up the screen. The fact that video of an aerobics 
dance routine filmed in front of a government 
overthrow exists in the same reality that the video 
game Dance Dance Revolution exists for a website 
headline to create a joke connecting the two is 
enough to short circuit my head. The event and the 
joke feel not only made for each other but mutually 
reliant on each other, as if the event did not 
chronologically come before the joke or the other 
way around, but the existence of the aerobics 
routine and the video game in relation to the joke 
headline were all given life in a moment of 
contingent revelation. It makes me question 
whether the video is even real, or was it perhaps 
staged just for this headline. Is this a marketing 
ploy by the makers of Dance Dance Revolution to 
reboot the series. Meanwhile, a nineteen year old 
girl, Mya Thwate Thwate Khaing, was shot as part 
of civilian protests, and died as she turned twenty. 
Enormous posters showing the moment she was 
shot have been hung from bridges by fellow 
protesters in Myanmar. Where does this young 
girl fit into the mess of spectacle and political 
violence, of uncanny video and _ tragicomic 
headlines, of economics and meaning, of 
international response and meaning, of her being 
described as a grocery store clerk and being able to 
view photos of her funeral on the same social 
media networks that facilitated genocide in the 


462 


country only a couple years prior and meaning, of 
something and meaning, anything, come on. 

I continue to float. The ocean waves keep 
pushing up and over the boundary of the baths. I 
wonder if any fish ever get in here. For a moment I 
try reaching my arms back behind my head so I am 
sleek like a fish, and I marvel at how much more 
air I am able to get into my lungs this way. How 
have I never tried this before. Lately I have felt like 
I have not been getting enough air when I breath, 
but now my lungs are rejoicing in oxygen. Floating 
in this posture I begin to sink a little, only slightly. 
My face gently dips under the water but I can still 
breath fine. The water laps over my eyes. There is 
nothing beneath me, nothing above me, just air 
filling my lungs that makes me feel lighter, 
emptier, with every breath. 


463 


464 


Ember Rim 


There is eighty to ninety percent flat 
black expanse between the pin prick 
glisten of the white and gold dot city 
behind the beach with an ember rim, 
why does it shine so, no necklace of 
lights or fire stake phosphorescence 
along the coastline, only lapping void 
and then I get it, the wing of the plane, 
its edge has caught some light of day 
inverted, a morning turning in reverse, 
not sand but aero alloy - waving hello. 


465 


466 


Craig lives in Hamilton, New South Wales with his 
wife, daughter and son. He is a school teacher and 
is the author of the novel 'A Complicated Surgery 
Will Take Place On The Beach Tonight' (2020), the 
filmed essay ‘Beyond Correct and Incorrect 
Nature’ (2021), the novella ‘Antinomicity' (2022) 
and the collection of short works 'Postseasonal' 
(2023). His poem ‘Autoincorrect' (2023) was 
shortlisted for the Newcastle Poetry Prize, and an 
academic work 'A Spectrum of Real' was published 
by Routledge in 'Gaming Disability’ (2022). 


He also records music under the name 
Wrenasmir, releasing LP albums _Disjecta 
Songjiang ‘11 - ‘15 (2016), Oct Mod Var (2020), 
Aubadion (2021), Partimentodays (2021) and 
Telegraph (2023). Selected tracks have also 
appeared on compilation albums for the German 
record label 'Bathurst'. 


467 


A selection of prose, poetry and plays from Newcastle-based 
author Craig Warren Smith. These pages offer a unique reading 
of internal and external landscapes, where panoramas of city and 
field interface with new relationships between human subjectivity 
and the technologies that unconceal our world. This is language as 
sense data, psychogeography and sweet nothing. The works in this 
volume were written between 2020 and 2025, including excerpts 
from novels and previously unpublished texts. 


Abrachas Publishing 


